The Project Gutenberg eBook of Essays on horse subjects
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Essays on horse subjects

Author: F. C. Grenside

Release date: March 20, 2025 [eBook #75671]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: n/a, 1907

Credits: Carol Brown, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS ON HORSE SUBJECTS ***



                               Essays
                          On Horse Subjects


                                 BY
                        F. C. GRENSIDE, V. S.


                           [Illustration]


                              NEW YORK
                          PRIVATELY PRINTED
                                1907




                         Copyright, 1907, by
                            F. C. GRENSIDE




                               PREFACE


Having been requested to contribute from time to time, articles for
papers devoted to the horse, I have an accumulation of these that I
thought it might not be amiss to publish under the title of “Essays
on Horse Subjects.”

Many of these subjects I have never seen any literature upon, and
these Essays are largely the result of twenty-eight years’ experience
as a practical horseman and veterinarian. Covering as they do the
borderland between the provinces of the veterinarian and horseman,
they relate to subjects which have been to a large extent neglected
by both. This fact is my excuse for publishing them.        F. C. G.




                              CONTENTS


                                                             PAGE

     QUALITY IN HORSES                                          1

     HEREDITARY UNSOUNDNESS IN HORSES                           8

     HITCHING IN HORSES                                        20

     HORSESHOEING AND HORSES’ HOOFS                            25

     CORRECT ACTION IN HORSES                                  34

     FORGING, OVER-REACHING AND CLICKING                       41

     INTERFERING, STRIKING, CUTTING OR BRUSHING IN HORSES      46

     THE HORSE’S MOUTH                                         54

     TURNING HORSES OUT                                        64

     BITTING, SHOEING AND CONDITIONING FOR ACTION              69

     EXERCISE FOR HORSES                                       90

     THE HORSE’S COAT IN SPRING, SUMMER, AUTUMN AND WINTER     98

     THE CAUSES OF DIGESTIVE DISORDERS                        105

     THE USE OF BURRS ON HORSES’ BITS                         124




                          QUALITY IN HORSES


There is no subject upon which there seems to be more diversity of
opinion amongst horsemen than as to what constitutes “quality” in a
horse.

It is a term in very common use, but if you ask a number of horsemen
what they mean by it you are sure to get a variety of answers. One
will say it means breeding; another, conformation; another, finish;
another, “class”; another, symmetry; another, individuality; another,
an accentuation of all fine points; another, magnetism; another,
refinement of lines or perhaps a combination of some or all of these
attributes. Some say that quality is recognizable, but indefinable
and unexplainable.

The term “quality” is an abstract one, indicating a special attribute
in an individual, just as being well bred, well conformed and
possessing finish are attributes of some individuals. When one says
that a horse has “quality,” one means that he has a special attribute
which may or may not be combined with any or all of the others
mentioned. Of course there are varying degrees of “quality,” so
that the term can only be used in a comparative sense. In the light
classes of horses it is very often used synonymously with breeding.
Certainly the more warm-blooded a horse is the higher the degree
of quality he is apt to possess, but one may take two equally well
bred thoroughbreds and find one showing evidence of the possession
of a higher degree of quality than the other. So that breeding and
quality do not mean the same thing. Neither does quality signify the
possession of symmetry, good conformation, finish or “class.” A horse
may be defective in any or all of these respects and still possess
a high degree of “quality.” He may be fiddle-headed, lop-eared,
ewe-necked, sway-backed, flat-sided, slack-loined, cow-hocked and
calf-kneed, and yet show much “quality.”

Much confusion is caused by using the term “quality” synonymously
with “class.” Horses are spoken of as high-class, medium-class and so
on, indicating the degree of excellence which they possess for the
purpose for which they are best suited. Two individuals can be taken
as an example, showing equal “quality,” but one of them, on account
of better conformation, more style and action, may be worth twice
as much as the other. Consequently he is a higher-class individual,
although the two are equal in “quality.” So that “quality” and
“class” do not mean the same.

If, then, “quality” does not mean breeding or conformation or
symmetry or finish or “class,” or a combination of any or all of
these, what does it mean? It is an easier matter to explain what
constitutes “quality” than it is to give a concise and at the same
time comprehensive definition of what it is. It may not inaptly
be defined as _fineness in contradistinction to coarseness_, or
as _fineness of texture_. How frequently one hears a prospective
purchaser say to a dealer: “He is a very nice horse, but very light
in bone.” The dealer almost invariably replies: “Yes, but his bone is
of good ‘quality,’” and still further endeavors to make the statement
more emphatic by saying that the bone is so dense, so compact, so
ivory-like, that a cubic inch of it will weigh more than a cubic inch
of some other horse that has indisputably more bone. It is a fact
that the bone of some horses is much more dense or compact, and is,
as the dealer expresses it, of better “quality” than that of some
others.

What causes this greater density in the bones of some individuals
than in those of others? We have to look to the elements of which
bone is composed for the determining cause. The animal tissues are
made up of fluids and solids. The solids are composed of three
simple elements, viz.: granules, fibres and cells that are only
determinable by means of a microscope. This difference of quality
is most easily determinable with regard to the element fibres.
The fibres that form part of the tissues of an individual of high
“quality” are more slender, more compact and tougher than those of
one of less “quality.” One can appreciate this even with the naked
eye, in examining the walls of horses’ hoofs. In a horse possessing
a fairly high degree of “quality,” the fibres which run from the
coronet down, in forming the basis of the wall, are most palpably
finer than in those of the wall of a coarser individual. So with
the bone; the elements that combine to form it in a horse of high
“quality” are finer and more highly organized than in those of a
coarser individual.

What you find in regard to quality in the bones of an individual,
you find pervading all the tissues of his organism. You do not
find a horse with coarse bone and fine skin, or coarse skin and
fine bone. If the bone is fine or has “quality,” the muscles,
tendons, ligaments, skin, hoofs, hair and all the other tissues
which enter into his composition are equally fine or are of equal
“quality.” The “quality” of a horse’s bone may be perfect, but
undue or disproportionate length or other defective form, or faulty
relationship of one bone to another, may make his conformation
very imperfect indeed, so that it is difficult to understand why
some horsemen think there is any relationship between “quality” and
conformation.

A high degree of “quality” is apt to be associated with defects, so
that one might almost state that a horse can have too much quality.
Size, or more correctly, substance, is strength, other things being
equal. A horse with a high degree of quality may be so lacking in
substance as to impair his power for the performance of work or
for severe tests of endurance or speed. He may be so light-limbed
that he cannot stand the “wear and tear” of hard work and remain
practically sound. We often find horses that are superfine with
disproportionately small feet, and every experienced horseman knows
that it is seldom that such horses do much work and remain sound.
A horse, however, cannot have too much “quality,” providing it is
combined with sufficient substance for the purpose for which he is
required. A high degree of “quality” and sufficient substance are
most important attributes in contributing to perfection in horseflesh.

There are many every-day evidences of the ill consequences of
deficient quality in horseflesh. You hear a horseman say that a horse
has soft legs, and he points out an individual inclined to fill
about the skin of the fetlocks, to show windgalls which extend up
the sheaths of his back tendons, and whose hocks are inclined to be
puffy throughout. If he gets a bruise or injury of any kind to the
skin of his legs, the consequent swelling is apt to extend and is
inclined to remain. Abrasions, cuts, cracks and scratches heal rather
tardily. Concussion and direct injury to bone are very much inclined
to result in bony enlargement, such as splints, that spread out and
have not well-defined limits. Standing in the stable too much readily
produces stocking of the legs; there is a predisposition to greasy
legs. The feet are inclined to be flat, large and easily bruised.

These tendencies show coarseness of tissue and low organization, a
meagre blood supply and inactive nutrition. Horses with “quality”
also develop windgalls and splints if subjected to sufficient cause,
but their character differs from those of coarse horses in being
clean-cut and well-defined and not having the tendency to spread out.
A horse with “quality” may have a bog spavin, but it will show as
a well-defined prominence and not as a round puffiness of the hock
throughout.

Draft horsemen talk “quality” just as much or more than those who
have to do with the light breeds. The difference in the “quality”
of individuals of the draft breeds is just as well marked as in the
light breeds. Take for instance a Clydesdale or Shire, both of which
breeds have a considerable quantity of long hair on the back of the
legs, which is often referred to as “feather.” If this hair is found
to be fine and silky, not coarse and wiry, you will find that it is
possessed by an individual that shows “quality” throughout. His skin
will not be coarse and beefy, his legs will be fluted, his bone will
have a tendency to flatness, showing density of structure. The hair
of his mane and tail will be fine, like that at the back of his legs.
The eminences and depressions formed by the bones of his head will
be comparatively finely chiseled. He, in fact, shows “quality” when
compared to other members of the same breed that are equally well
bred as far as possessing the characteristics of the breed, and as
far as the stud book is an indication of breeding. This is a further
example of the fallacy of the view that “quality” and breeding are
the same thing.




                  HEREDITARY UNSOUNDNESS IN HORSES


The question of hereditary unsoundness in all its aspects is by no
means an open book to the horse-breeder, but it is one well worth
studying by him, if as thorough a knowledge as is possible of this
subject will tend to lessen the percentage of unsound stock produced.
Of the various causes which tend to make horse-raising disappointing
and unprofitable, this is one of the important ones, if not the most
important. Literally speaking, it is not so much the inheritance
of a disease itself that we fear, but it is the tendency to the
development of this disease. Comparatively few foals are dropped
with unsoundnesses, that impair their value ultimately, but there
are many that are foaled with a predisposition to the development of
unsoundness. The study of this subject, then, practically resolves
itself into a consideration of what constitutes the predisposing
causes of unsoundness.

They may be divided into several heads, viz: Defective formation,
defective quality, and insufficient quantity of tissue and
temperament. Within certain limits, the practised eye of the
observant horseman can determine in sire or dam the existence of
these defects that are transmissible to the offspring, and predispose
it to the development of unsoundness.

It is claimed by some authorities that some horses and mares possess
a peculiar habit of body, an indefinable something about them which
predisposes them and also their progeny to the development of some
unsoundness. Such cases are rare, however, and their supposed
existence is very frequently the result of the inability of an
observer to appreciate the existence of detectible predisposing
causes. If this indefinable something is the determining cause of
predisposition in some cases, then the only positive evidence of
its existence is the developed unsoundness. This theory presupposes
that none of the detectible predisposing causes already mentioned
exist in sufficient degree in such cases, so that when subjects
of them are subjected to more than ordinarily exciting ones they
would develop unsoundness unless the peculiar habit of body exists.
It is also an acknowledgment of the helplessness of breeders in
a considerable degree to prevent breeding colts with an inherent
tendency to unsoundness. No matter how capable and careful a
breeder is he will produce a certain percentage of unsound stock,
due to heredity, but with care it can be reduced to a small one.
Many breeders use a sire from convenience or from some quality he
possesses, such as speed, action, style or disposition, knowing they
are taking a chance of perpetuating some tendency to unsoundness
that he possesses. Favorite mares are also bred, with a disregard
to the well-established principle that “like begets like,” even
when they are the victims of hereditary unsoundness or a strong
predisposition to it. The successful breeder must divest himself
of all sentiment and be capable of appreciating all defects which
constitute predisposition to unsoundness. Of the predisposing causes,
defective formation is the most fertile one. The predisposition to
navicular disease is hereditary. Horses with narrow, deep heels are
predisposed to it. Some observers may say: “But look at the large
number of horses one sees with narrow, deep heels that have not
got navicular disease.” Of course, such an argument is fallacious,
as there may be many compensating conditions that will tend to
neutralize the tendency to this disease in some subjects. A horse
with the formation of foot described, even although he is subjected
to the exciting causes of hard, fast and steady work, and irrational
and infrequent shoeing, may be endowed by nature with a very light
step. Nothing tends to prevent “wear and tear” of the legs and feet
like light stepping. Here, then, is an example of an influence which
tends to counterbalance the ill effects of a defective formation,
but renders complicated the study of formation as a predisposing
cause of unsoundness. One, then, has to weigh the influence of
compensating conditions in determining the ill-consequences likely
to result from defective formations of feet when transmitted to
offspring. That defective formation of feet is handed down to progeny
there is no manner of doubt. The predisposition to ringbone is
undoubtedly hereditary, and when the pastern is of good formation
one seldom finds it unless it is the result of some extraordinarily
exciting cause. The two extremes of long, light oblique pasterns,
and the short, straight coarse ones, are both predisposed, the
former from the tension to which the ligaments are subjected, and
consequent tendency to sprain, and the latter from the increased
tendency to concussion. As we proceed up the front leg we find
defective formation in the neighborhood of the knee, predisposing
to unsoundness. Many horses that are more or less knee-sprung
are practically sound. Others become progressively weak and are
decidedly unsound; so that we are not much amiss in characterizing
the condition called knee-sprung as an hereditary unsoundness. A
commission was appointed some years ago in England to make out a list
of hereditary unsoundnesses. The list included navicular disease,
ringbone, spavin, sidebone, periodic ophthalmia or moonblindness,
and roaring. It will be observed that knee-sprung was not included.
In order not to complicate matters they made the list as short as
possible, and only included the most serious forms of unsoundness
or those that are very obstinate in yielding to treatment or are
incurable. Unsoundnesses such as knee-sprung, curb or splint, though
the tendency to them is undoubtedly hereditary, were not included.
This was because these conditions seldom permanently interfere with
a horse’s practical soundness. A horse is what is called “tied in”
below the knee when the leg immediately below that joint is narrower
from before backwards, than it is just above the fetlock. In this
condition the tendons behind the knee are not well developed, and
are placed too close to the shank-bone at this point. This imperfect
tendonous development in a front leg is not usually confined to the
tendons behind the leg, called the flexor tendons, as an imperfect
development of these tendons is usually associated with an impaired
development of the tendons running down the front of the leg called
the extensor tendons. Such a condition frequently results in shaky
knees, and if the subject experiences hard work, he is likely to
become progressively worse. In some cases the flexor tendons appear
to be much better developed than the extensors, and in an individual
so formed, particularly if he is inclined to stand with his forefeet
well back under him, there is an inordinate strain on the extensors,
leading to relaxation and a corresponding tendency to contraction of
the flexors. Here we have a lack of balance between the extensors
and flexors, and the result is a knee-sprung condition. Although
shaky-kneed or knee-sprung horses are not frequently incapacitated
for work, the breeder should not lose sight of the fact that this
condition is apt to considerably depreciate a horse’s value in the
market, particularly for some purposes, and he can seldom afford to
ignore this fact. It is not intended to advise breeders never to
breed to a sire that stands a little over in the knees, especially
if sufficient cause can be assigned for it, but we should recommend
them to be very wary about using sires and dams that show a
congenital tendency to this defect. Purchasers of horses usually look
with considerable disfavor on a horse that is at all knee-sprung.
Personally, the writer would rather buy a horse for his own use that
is a little forward in the knees than one that stands back in them
or is what is called calf-kneed. A horse with the former defect
is almost sure to be much more elastic in his step than one with
the latter and, consequently, will not suffer to the same extent
from the ill-effects of concussion. A calf-kneed horse is also much
more likely to suffer from strains. Knee-sprung, unlike the other
unsoundnesses given in the list of hereditary troubles, is not very
infrequently congenital. Swan-necked horses and those with thick,
coarse throttles are considered to be of the formations most liable
to develop the defect of the wind called “roaring.” In Great Britain
and Ireland and on the continent of Europe, breeders are usually very
particular about avoiding roarers for breeding purposes. The climatic
conditions there seem favorable to its development; but in this
country it is not nearly so much to be feared, and one should not
hold aloof from an otherwise desirable sire on account of his being
a roarer, though it must be admitted that the predisposition to the
trouble may be transmitted. The predisposition to periodic ophthalmia
or moonblindness is handed down from parent to offspring, but it
is not nearly so common in this country as it once was, when the
sanitary conditions were not so good; and it may be that some care
has been exercised in breeding, so as to avoid its propagation. The
only appreciable evidence of a predisposition to this unsoundness,
outside of the existence of the disease, is the small or what is
called “pig eye.” The writer knew a sire well that had “pig eyes” but
sound ones, and they remained sound throughout his long life, but
certainly ten per cent. of his progeny developed moonblindness.

The tendency to string-halt is undoubtedly transmissible from
parent to offspring. Horses with snappy hock action are most likely
to develop it. Nowadays it is not feared nearly so much as it was
formerly, for if it should develop, a very large percentage of
cases are curable by a not very difficult and by no means dangerous
operation, which consists in the cutting of a tendon. A change has
taken place in the generally accepted view as to the nature of
string-halt. It was considered a purely nervous malady until it was
found that the cutting of a tendon would in many instances cure it.

Curb, although not, as I remember it, included in the list of
hereditary unsoundnesses, is decidedly hereditary, as well as the
predisposition to it. It is not an infrequent occurrence to find
foals “dropped” with curbs which frequently disappear in a large
measure. But there is always some trace of them remaining. It is
the rarest possible occurrence to find a broad hock, and one with
the tendon standing well out behind, with any sign of curb. Narrow
hocks and those with the point dipped forward towards the body of the
joint; a leg with small circumference immediately below the hock,
or what is commonly called tied in; those with the back tendon
not standing out posterior to the bone at the back and outer part
of hock--in addition to these indications of weakness and tendency
to curb, if the joint is crooked, or what is called sickle-shaped,
the predisposition is much increased. Curb is not so very much
feared by some breeders, as it seldom causes permanent lameness. It
is, however, a great eyesore; it depreciates a horse’s value very
considerably, and it is liable to cause recurring lameness.

Crooked hocks, unduly straight hocks, narrow hocks, small hocks,
those bent inwards or outwards, are all of weak formation, and are
consequently predisposed, amongst other unsoundnesses, to bone
spavin. Even though a horse should happen to have a bone spavin,
provided he has a strongly formed hock, it would be safer to take
a chance of breeding to him than one with a sound hock but of weak
formation. So far we have run over briefly most of the defective
formations that predispose to serious hereditary unsoundness. We
have divided the causes into four heads, the second one of which was
“insufficient quantity.” The old saying, “Size is strength, others
things being equal,” applies to a horse’s extremities. We frequently
hear it said that such and such a horse has “plenty of timber
under him.” By this is meant that the individual in question has
sufficient substance in the various structures that make up his legs
and feet to give them strength and ability to stand “wear and tear.”

The practical horseman of experience learns that the horse with
disproportionately small feet seldom stands much work without
going sore from some unsoundness of these organs. So with the
slender-pasterned horse. He is not only subject to strain at that
point, but predisposed to ringbone. The horse light under the knee
is apt to suffer from strains of the tendons and ligaments in that
situation, as well as troublesome splints. Proportionately large
joints give wearing ability to the legs. This is well exemplified
in the case of hocks with plenty of tissue in them. The sire that
transmits small hocks to his offspring has handed down to him one of
the most prolific sources of unsoundness in these joints. Defects
of formation of these joints are often a cause of trouble, as has
already been pointed out, but not so much so in my experience as
lack of size. Stating that a horse has plenty of timber under him
does not cover all cases, as some horses have plenty of tissue in
their front legs and are deficient in their hind ones. In addition
to formation and quantity of tissue, “quality” is of vast importance
in influencing the wearing ability of the legs and feet. Parents
transmit with great faithfulness to their progeny defects in the
quality of the horn of hoofs. Shelly, brittle hoofs are strongly
predisposed to crack, developing sand and quarter cracks on slight
provocation, and giving rise to that very troublesome inability
of being unable to hold the shoes tightly. Brittle hoofs are not
necessarily coarse in fibre. Hoofs of coarse fibre lack the density
of structure which generally contributes to toughness. Undue size
of foot, low heels and flat soles, with a tendency to be easily
bruised, are apt to be associated with a lack of quality in the horn
structure. A horse with bone of a spongy character or lacking in
density is deficient in quality. Such an individual is predisposed to
inflammatory diseases of bone, such as splints, sore shins, ringbone
and spavin. The lack of quality in a horse is particularly well shown
in the skin of his legs. The tendency to the development of cracked
heels, stocked legs, mud fever and grease is very evident on slight
provocation. Sires deficient in quality are apt to transmit to their
progeny the tendency to what are called soft-legs, in which there is
not only the inclination of the skin to swell up from little cause,
but windgalls, puffy sheaths of tendons and boggy hocks are easily
induced. If, then, we accept these statements with regard to quality,
as it would appear that every practical horseman must, we must admit
that coarseness or lack of quality is by no means an unimportant
factor in contributing to hereditary predisposition to unsoundness.
Temperament is the last of the four heads into which we divided the
predisposing causes of hereditary unsoundness. Although it must be
admitted that it has an influence, we look upon it as the least
important of the four. The nervous horse that jumps and gets excited
on slight provocation; the anxious horse that is always up in his
collar and against the bit, are more taxing on the physical mechanism
than easier-going horses. We cannot afford to quite ignore this
question of temperament in selecting sires and dams, but if the legs
and feet are well formed, have sufficient substance, and are made up
of a good quality of tissue, they will generally stand any taxing
that may result from a high-strung temperament.




                         HITCHING IN HORSES


Of the many defects of action that horses show, one that detracts
very much from the gracefulness of movement in the trot and walk is
“hitching.” It is a peculiar hopping movement which results from a
lack of power, or from defective balance. It is said that good cooks
are born, not made. Exactly the opposite is the case with “hitchers”;
they are made, not born, although there is no doubt that some colts
are foaled with a predisposition to “hitch.” Still, even then, it may
be kept in abeyance by good handling. The causes of “hitching,” then,
may be said to be predisposing and exciting. Of the predisposing ones
the most prolific is the want of power and freedom of movement in
the hindquarter. Cat-hammed horses, those with short hindquarters,
and those that stand with their hocks too far behind them, are very
liable to “hitch.” Bad driving is a cause that frequently contributes
to this fault. Some drivers will make almost every young horse they
handle get into the habit, for it becomes almost a habit in some
individuals.

Starting off at too fast a pace, urging a horse beyond his speed,
particularly if he has a heavy trap behind him, and allowing him
to go uncollectedly from driving with a loose rein, are causes.
Drivers that allow horses to rattle along with their heads loose,
particularly if they are inclined to be free, will make many
hitchers, especially amongst young horses and those in which there is
a predisposition to the fault.

Besides the causes already discussed and really the most important
of all, is the mouth, for a very large percentage of “hitching” is
referable to that organ. Horses which carry their heads steadily,
hold them straight, with no crossing of jaws or opening of the
mouth, and which keep their tongues in position under the bit and
have responsive, firm mouths, never “hitch” when they have proper
driving. Any discomfort of the mouth caused by bruises, abrasions
or excoriations, making a horse sideline or bore, is very apt, in
the case of a very prompt horse, to cause “hitching.” On the other
hand, horses that do not face the bit firmly on account of soreness
of the mouth or from the bit being placed too low in the mouth or
from lack of courage, or any cause that makes them go with unsteady
heads, are apt to “hitch.” A driver or rider with what is called bad
hands is also apt to make a horse “hitch.” A driver with bad hands
either takes a heavy, unyielding grip of the reins, or else holds
them unsteadily, either of which causes is apt to put a horse off his
balance.

The uninitiated are apt to mistake “hitching” for lameness, and it
is very hard to persuade them to the contrary, especially if a horse
keeps doing it persistently. It is not an unsoundness, however, for
there is no lesion necessarily of the extremity “hitched.” Habitual
“hitching” is a fault or defect, just the same as other defects of
action and “forging” are faults.

If a horse is a persistent “hitcher,” however, he might almost as
well be lame, as far as the unsightliness of the gait is concerned.
In good hands, however, there is not much fear of it becoming
habitual, and if it has become so from any cause, it can usually be
remedied by good handling.

In standing about sale and show rings, we frequently hear onlookers
say that such and such a horse is going lame behind, when in reality
he is only “hitching.” At sale and show times horses are frequently
urged and pulled together to a degree very apt to put them off their
balance, especially when they are called upon to keep making short
turns. Some horses, even at the walk, will persistently “hitch” in
being ridden in a ring when sharply bitted. Horses may be seen to
drag and hop on one hind leg in going around a ring at a walk when
ridden with bit and bridoon, but if a change is made to a snaffle
bit they will go squarely, thus showing how a sharp bit will cause
unsteadiness and irregularity of the gait in some light-mouthed
horses.

In case there is any doubt as to whether irregularity of the gait is
due to lameness or to “hitching,” it is easily settled by jogging the
animal in question at a slow trot “in hand” without any bit in the
mouth, or at most a plain snaffle, with the head loose and carried
straight. It may be emphasized here that the only true test in the
determination of the question as to whether a horse goes sound or
not, unless the lameness is fairly pronounced, is to jog “in hand”
as already explained. Horses are sometimes condemned as going lame
in the show ring when it is impossible to determine with certainty
whether they are lame or not until taken out of harness and run
“in hand.” It is sometimes a help, in deciding whether a horse is
slightly sore forward or not, to get on his back, when the increased
weight on the legs will intensify the tenderness.

The idea of a horse “hitching” in front is sometimes ridiculed, but
occasionally one may be seen to do it unmistakably, and it is usually
the result of some discomfort in connection with the mouth. As has
been already said, anything that puts a horse off his balance is
liable to make him “hitch.” A horse may be said to be “balanced”
when every leg bears its proper proportion of weight and also exerts
its share of propulsion. The position of the head is very important
in regulating balance. If it is carried too low, too much weight is
thrown on the fore extremities; if too high, too much strain is put
on the hind ones. It is most important that the head shall be carried
steadily and in proper position, for a want of firmness in its
carriage is apt to put a horse off his balance and consequently lead
to “hitching.”




                   HORSESHOEING AND HORSES’ HOOFS


As with many other subjects relating to horseflesh, there is a
wide diversity of opinion as to the treatment of the horse’s hoof,
particularly as to that phase of it which has to do with shoeing. In
New York, especially, there is a deeply rooted prejudice in favor of
allowing the hoofs to grow out to very considerable proportions. If
you ask some of the strong advocates of this practice their reason
for it, you get the nonexplanatory answer that they like to see a
horse with a good foot. The question then naturally presents itself:
Does a luxuriant growth of horn constitute a good foot, and is a long
hoof conducive to the welfare of the foot and that portion of the
extremity above it? There is no doubt you can take liberties with
a horse’s foot with impunity under some circumstances, but if you
want a horse to do everyday work, the nearer you get a hoof to its
proper dimensions the better for the foot and the leg above it. For
ordinary work the hoof should be kept of such dimensions that every
part of the lower surface of it shall bear its proportionate amount
of weight, and that there shall be no disturbance in the proper
relations of the various parts that make up the legs and feet.

Dealers keep their horses’ toes long because length of toe increases
their action. A horse with long toes is bound to exert more muscular
force in order to raise his feet off the ground and extend them in
progression; consequently his action is increased. As they do not
work their horses hard, but merely give them exercise enough to keep
them well mannered to show to their customers, they do not as a rule
experience the ill-results they would if they were worked fairly
hard. The same remarks apply to heavy harness show horses, that are
simply kept in condition to show all the style and action possible.

Everyday work, however, is another matter. The dealer and showman is
right from his standpoint, but not from the standpoint of the owner
who is looking for everyday service.

Too long a toe acts as a lever and very much increases the tension of
the tendons and ligaments that support the fetlocks, rendering them
liable to strain, and also increasing the tendency to windgalls.

Too long a toe is also a fertile cause of corns, as it increases very
much the pressure on the heels and consequent liability to bruise the
quick of the foot at that place, which bruise constitutes a corn.

Besides having the toes too long, the heels are allowed to grow down,
taking all the pressure off the frog. Nature intended the frog to
bear its proper proportion of weight, and, if it doesn’t do so, it
shrinks, the heels contract, and the inner quarter curls in and acts
as a wedge between the shoe and the quick, and is thereby another
cause of corns. Too long a hoof hastens fatigue, as the increased
exertion necessary in raising and advancing the foot in progression
augments the expenditure of force. The tendency to “interfere” is
also much increased.

This prejudice in favor of keeping the hoofs long has been brought
about and encouraged largely by the example and expressed opinions of
dealers. A dealer sells a horse with long hoofs, and the purchaser
sends him to the forge. The shoer, unless he has been otherwise
definitely instructed, and if he understands what is best for
the horse’s legs and feet, will reduce the hoofs to their normal
proportions. When the owner drives or rides his new purchase again,
he finds the action curtailed, and thinks the horse is going sore. He
applies to the seller of the horse, who tells him that he has had his
feet cut away so much that it has made him sore. This might be the
case in exceptional instances, but very rarely.

In addition to reduction of the hoofs in size, the shoes may be
lightened, which further lessens the action. What are called “green
horses” are very apt to go sore if put abruptly into work, from the
fact that their tissues have not been by degrees hardened for work;
in other words, they are not in condition, and it will take some
weeks before they can be safely put into anything like hard work.

After reading the foregoing, it will naturally be asked: What is
the guide in determining the dimensions to which the hoof should
be reduced at the time of shoeing? The practised eye of the man
who understands the natural poise of the horse’s leg can determine
at a glance how much to reduce the hoof so that every part of the
leg and foot will approximately bear its due proportion of weight.
The direction of the line of weight in the extremities varies in
different individuals and nature can be assisted by regulating the
direction of this line in order that no part shall be unduly taxed.
The horse with the straight pastern and high heel is apt to suffer
from the ill-effects of concussion, while the oblique-pasterned horse
is more likely to suffer from strain. The ill-consequences of these
defects of formation can be neutralized in a measure by regulating
the length of hoof according to circumstances. For instance, the
disadvantage of long and oblique pasterns can be overcome in a
measure by keeping the hoof shortened up as much as possible,
thereby reducing the tension on the supporting tissues of the
fetlock. In the same way the elasticity of tread can be promoted in a
straight-pasterned horse by reasonable length of toe.

Nature in some instances supplies compensations for defects of
formation. In the fore extremity, the oblique shoulder, long arm and
forearm and smooth flexion of the joints may in a measure counteract
the injurious consequences of calf-knees and unduly short and
straight pasterns. Added to this there may be that lightness of step,
with which some horses are endowed, that has its determining cause in
the nervous system, and which so much aids the wearing ability of the
legs and feet.

Fleming, who is a justly recognized authority on horseshoeing, gives
as a guide to determine the amount a horse’s hoof should be reduced
at the time of shoeing, that the hoof should be shortened by the rasp
until it is flush with what is called the “white line.” The “white
line” is that portion of the hoof that forms the connecting medium
between the outer margin of the sole and the inner and lower margin
of the wall. Its outline is very clearly defined in a freshly rasped
hoof. Fleming, doubtless, assumes that the sole and white line have
not been reduced with the knife, but have been allowed to remain, as
nature intended them, of their normal thickness.

Just here it may be remarked that the practice of paring away the
sole of the foot, or in other words, thinning it, is a pernicious one.

The shoer appears to like to do this, as it cuts very easily and
gives, as he thinks, a “neat” appearance to the hoof. The owner
appears to endorse this, as he is very careful to have his groom stop
the feet, forgetting that he has permitted the shoer to remove a much
more efficient stopping than any artificial one in the outer surface
of the sole. This is very easy of explanation and illustration if one
takes an unmutilated hoof. First of all it must be noted that the
outer hard and tough crust, called the wall, grows out indefinitely,
unless it is worn or broken off by contact with the ground or
reduced by the instruments of the former. This is not the case with
the sole, for it is so constituted that after it attains a certain
thickness, by a process of nature it exfoliates of its own accord,
thus maintaining its normal thickness. These outer scales that keep
coming off are nature’s stopping. Why? Because by protecting the
inner and deeper layer from the drying effects of the air, they
maintain moisture that is necessary in the sole. If, by paring, you
cut through and examine a normal sole, you will find that the part
next to the quick (the part freshly secreted by the quick) is moist,
and as you proceed to the surface of the sole it gradually gets
dryer, the outer part being almost entirely free from moisture and
admirably adapted to protect the inner and moister part until it is
gradually forced outward by fresh growth from within and becomes in
its turn a “stopping” for the inner and freshly formed layer of sole.
What happens if the knife is used instead of nature being allowed to
go on with its own process of desquamation? Why, the deeper parts
of the sole become exposed to the action of the air before they are
prepared for it by a gradual process of drying, and abruptly dry and
contract. This is what causes the sole to become increasedly cupped,
and the hoof to become contracted in a great measure. The stopping
of horses’ hoofs is not always necessary if the sole is left, as it
should be, in an unmutilated condition, unless horses are made to
stand a great deal upon dry floors. Much of the fuss and waste of
time and material involved in the stopping of horses’ hoofs are based
on error. All that is necessary to remove the sole in a normal foot
is accomplished when the rasp is flatly applied to the lower surface
of the wall in reducing it to its proper dimensions. The thicker the
sole the better, provided it does not project below the wall, or
receive too much pressure from the shoe. One can readily understand
how much more efficient a thick sole is as a protection to the
underlying quick, especially on rough, frozen and stony roads, than a
comparatively thin one.

Now, if the sole is left thick, as it should be, and in which case
the white line would necessarily be, it is a good guide for the
shoer, in the majority of cases, to rasp down to the white line.
Another error frequently made, though not so common as mutilation
of the sole, is cutting away the frog. It does not require a deep
student of physiology of the foot to see almost at a glance the
function of the frog. Take a normal hoof and examine the frog and you
will observe that it is placed at the back of the hoof, where the
major portion of the pressure comes. You further find that, unlike
either the sole or the wall, it is endowed with elasticity equal to
india rubber. It is very evident that it is intended not only to come
in contact with the ground, but also to act as a buffer in lessening
concussion. Now, what happens if you cut it away and leave the heel
so high that it does not come in contact with the ground? Why, it
shrinks and becomes as hard as wood, entirely unsuited to stand
pressure without bruising the underlying quick, and no longer capable
of performing its office of breaking concussion. Not only that, but
with a thin, dried-up sole, the shrunken hoof draws the quarters
with it, and you have contracted feet or at least contracted heels.
After this mischief has been done through ignorance, then the horse
must have that curer of all ills of the foot (according to some wise
ones), spreaders, to overcome the contraction of the hoof.

Although horses are largely kept under artificial conditions, there
is no reason why their hoofs should become contracted if rationally
treated, unless some disease of the foot develops, such as navicular
disease. Under such circumstances, the contraction is the result of
disease, not the cause of it.

Another point that should be carefully watched in preparing the hoof
for the reception of the shoe is to have it level. If either inside
or outside of the hoof is left too long, it changes the direction
of the line of weight and subjects some portion or portions of the
extremity to undue strain or pressure and consequent liability to
injury.

Horses that are turned out into soft fields or put into box stalls or
barnyards, where there is not sufficient attrition to wear the hoof
to its normal dimensions, should have it rasped down every month to
its proper proportions. This particularly applies to young colts,
and neglect of it is the initial step in causing hoofs of defective
formation.




                      CORRECT ACTION IN HORSES


While it is the intention of this article to endeavor to picture
ideally good action, by which wear and tear and loss of power are
reduced to a minimum, it is not intended to decry the possession for
certain purposes, by a horse, of what is usually called high action.
To render horses attractive for show and for pleasure purposes it
is a highly desirable quality and very much increases their market
value. The good horseman would much prefer, however, to sit behind a
horse with moderate action, that raises his feet, advances them in a
straight line with stride enough to insure desirable progress--yet
not so much that the feet cannot be put down squarely--every part
bearing its proper proportion of weight and striking the ground
lightly, than one with excessive but markedly defective action. High
action, like other qualities possessed in a high degree, is very
apt to be associated with defects that detract from its perfection
and lessen a horse’s wearing quality. The ill-consequences of these
defects are intensified in direct ratio to the excessiveness of the
action. The craze for high action at any cost is not so rampant as
it used to be some years ago. Horse-show promoters became wearied
of seeing their premiums for action carried off by acrobatic
monstrosities, and it caused them to modify the wording of their
prize lists and call for all-around goers with twenty-five per cent.
for conformation. The horse that winds his legs about, “straddles,”
“points,” “rolls,” “spreads behind,” “waddles,” or drags his hind
legs, is no longer in favor with the good judge, no matter how
excessive his action.

The character of the action is a very important factor in determining
the amount of wear and tear a horse will stand. To become a good
judge of action is not such an easy matter as might be imagined.
There are many who have a good eye for a horse, and, in fact, are,
in a measure, good judges, who cannot intelligently criticize a
horse’s action from different standpoints. There are many who are
taken with flashy action, which, as a rule, enhances the market
value of a horse possessing it, but is very apt to be associated
with greater defects from a utilitarian standpoint than that which
is less attractive. In estimating the quality of action correctly
in different individuals one has to have an ideal. How seldom in
sitting behind a horse and closely observing his way of going at the
trot and walk, do we find action that comes up to our ideal! Perfect
action, as far as usefulness is concerned, is frictionless and light,
and the foot is placed on the ground squarely. There is no loss of
time or power in progression, or, in other words, the frictionless
mover does not labor, neither does the light-stepper experience
the ill-effects of concussion, which is the result of bringing the
foot to the ground in a pounding manner. What a saving of wear and
tear and power the smooth-mover and light-stepper experiences! One
is amazed in instances to observe how much work a weak-footed,
poor-legged horse will stand and still remain in workable condition.
It can be accounted for in many cases by the defects mentioned being
compensated for by light action.

It is interesting and instructive to study the numerous and varying
conditions that conduce to defective action. Lightness of step
appears to be a quality not always dependent upon the conformation of
the individual. For instance, length and obliquity of the pasterns
are usually said to cause lightness and elasticity of the tread, but
do not always do so, for we find many heavy-going horses of this
formation. Mechanically, this should conduce to light-stepping, and
does in a measure, but the fact that horses with oblique pasterns
sometimes pound, leads us to look for another explanation. The
statement may be advanced, in explanation, that the elasticity
resulting from oblique pasterns may be neutralized by a straight
shoulder; but this theory will not hold, as one not infrequently
finds straight-shouldered, short-pasterned horses which step lightly.
Another explanation must be found. We have to seek elsewhere in
the animal economy than in the peculiar arrangement of the bones,
muscles, tendons and ligaments of the limbs to account for the light
step of some horses.

The endowment with this desirable quality is undoubtedly referable to
the nervous system, just as speed is. We cannot determine the degree
of a horse’s speed by studying his external form. We have to subject
him to a test, and so we have in forming a conclusion as to the
degree of lightness or heaviness of his step.

With regard to labored progression, the tendency to it is usually
determinable by an inspection of a horse’s conformation. All
deviations from the steadily carried top in the trot, in which there
is no rolling, jerking or waddling, and from the straight flexion
and extension of the forelegs, in which there is no straddling,
dishing or winding-in, and from the equally straight and easy flexion
of the hock, can, as a rule, be determined by an examination of an
individual’s conformation. The horse with thick or loaded shoulders
and wide chest is apt to roll; the one that stands with his forefeet
placed wide apart, straddles; the knock-kneed one, as well as the one
that toes-in, generally dishes, while the horse that toes-out, winds
in. The horse with his hocks wide apart and feet close together,
“screws” his hocks outwards and usually “plaits.” When the hocks
are placed behind instead of under the quarters there is likely
to be a dragging movement of the hind legs. It is therefore true
that faulty progression is usually determinable by conformation.
Defective conformation of the legs shows itself with almost unvarying
regularity in its effect upon the action. In order to have straight,
undeviating action a horse must flex and extend his legs during
progression in a line parallel to the long axis of the body. The
knock-kneed, bow-legged, or even calf-kneed horse cannot do this, and
consequently experiences the ill-results of loss of time and power in
progression.

Apart altogether from the question of the degree of the lightness
or heaviness of the step, the manner in which the feet are placed
on the ground has a great influence in determining wear and tear,
and is consequently an important point to study. The horse that
toes-in usually has the inside quarter of his forefeet defectively
developed, which becomes more marked if he is not rationally shod.
This defect of formation of the inner quarter consists in a slanting
off of it from before backwards and outwards and from above downward
and toward the centre of the foot, causing this quarter to assume
a wedge-like form and literally to act as a wedge between the shoe
and the sensitive part of the inner quarter, thus predisposing it
to bruising. In addition to this, the horse that “dishes” usually
brings his foot down with force on the inner quarter. This manner of
planting the foot not only subjects the ligaments to undue tension,
but is a fruitful source of troublesome corns.

On the other hand, a horse that toes-out is apt to come down with
most force on the outside of his foot. This is a much more defective
formation than the former, for it not only causes winding-in and
great liability to interfere, but the planting of the foot is
usually accomplished in a manner that results in the production of
considerable concussion, and also subjects the ligaments to great
tension, so that the legs soon begin to show the effects of wear and
tear. Some horses come down with most force on their toes, causing
them to stub their toes, as it is called. Such a manner of planting
the foot is apt to cause stumbling and increases concussion to a
marked extent. Short-pasterned, straight-shouldered, and short-gaited
horses often show this defect.

Just the opposite manner of planting the foot or coming down with
the heel first is not at all uncommon. This defect of action is
not only likely to cause bruising of the heels, but subjects the
tendons and ligaments at the lower and back portion of the forelegs
to excessive strain. Ordinarily this imperfection is only observed
in long-gaited horses, but some that plant their feet in a favorable
manner when going at a slow pace, when forced to a faster one
lengthen their stride, and show this defect, often called “pointing,”
to a pronounced degree. Deep and oblique-shouldered horses with
little knee action, like thoroughbreds, often go in this way, but its
ill-effects are not so great as in those with a considerable amount
of knee action.

“Threading” or “plaiting” are terms used to designate the swinging
of the elevated foot around the one that is placed on the ground in
progression. This ungraceful manner of going, which occasions a loss
of power, is most clearly shown in the walk or slow trot.




                 FORGING, OVER-REACHING AND CLICKING

This Paper Won the Prize Given by _The American Veterinary Review_
for the Best Essay on This Subject


That very disagreeable and annoying fault of striking the forefeet
with the hind ones during progression, variously referred to as
“clicking,” “over-reaching” and “forging,” is one to which some
horses are predisposed; but it is excited by a number of conditions
which can, as a rule, be remedied by rational treatment, even in some
instances where there is a predisposition. Forging is the result of
any cause that prevents a horse from getting his forefeet out of the
way of his hind ones, in progression.

Undue shortness of body is a frequent predisposing cause, but one
must not fall into the error frequently made of assuming that a
short-backed horse is necessarily a short-bodied one. A horse may
have a short back but long quarters, causing him to stand over a lot
of ground or be what is called “long underneath,” and be anything but
short-bodied, and in fact possessing the ideal formation, as far
as this point is concerned, and be anything but inclined to forge.
Horses with the fore pasterns disproportionately long, when compared
to the hind ones, especially if the forefeet are also inclined to
unusual length, experience retardation in the flexion and extension
of the forelegs, to a degree that renders interference from the hind
ones liable.

An important factor in good action is the straight advancing of the
forelegs in progression. Any deviation from this, as in wind-out or
winding-in, or a combination of these two defects, sometimes called
“wiggling,” retards sufficiently prompt action of the forelegs to
enable the feet to make way for the hind ones. These defects of
action are the result of the fact that the bones that make up the
foundation of the legs are defectively related to one another in
forming the joints. There are very palpable illustrations of these
defects of formation in horses with “knock-knees,” calf-knees,
turned-in or turned-out pasterns. We notice in individuals a lack
of harmony in formation between the fore and hind extremities. For
instance, some horses have the pasterns of the hind extremities of
a length disproportionate to those of the fore, and vice-versa. So
with action: some have quick and extensive flexion of the hock, out
of proportion to the degree of promptness of flexion and extension
of the forelegs. Such horses are liable to forge. Those that stand
lower at the withers than they do at the highest point of the croup
are also liable to this fault, as are also low-headed horses,
particularly if they are of a sluggish temperament, as they not only
lack “snap” in their action, but the lowness forward interferes with
the freedom of the forward action.

In addition to the predisposing causes of forging there are a number
of exciting ones, and horses that cannot be said to be predisposed
may be found to forge under certain circumstances. Perhaps the
exciting cause most frequently in operation is the lack of strength
or condition. Many young horses forge for a time, or until they have
been fed and worked sufficiently to establish nervous force and
proper muscular development, so that they have perfect control of
their legs.

Horses that are not in good condition may go a mile or two without
“clicking,” but as soon as they become fatigued or winded, begin to
forge. They are particularly apt to do this if driven or ridden fast
at first, and the more so if the weight they are drawing or carrying
is excessive for the pace at which they are traveling.

Horses that are called upon to carry a rider--not being used to
it--may temporarily show this fault, particularly if the footing is
soft or going heavy.

Those used to the hard footing and light draft of the pavement in
cities may never be heard to forge until driven on a country road
where the draft is greater and the going heavier.

The mouth, too, is not without an exciting influence. The horse that
has a hard, unyielding, unresponsive mouth is much more liable to
forge than one that, at a touch of the whip or spur, will raise his
head, get his nose in, and respond to the pressure of the bit, so as
to go in a balanced manner.

Indifferent riders and drivers that have bad hands, and do not know
how to keep their horses collected, will allow many to over-reach.

One need never be discouraged about a young well proportioned horse,
but should wait until the mouth is made, the animal got into good
condition by steady judicious work, good feeding and grooming.

In horses inclined to “click,” the forefeet should be kept as short
as possible, and the shoes for them should be as light as can be
used in order to conserve their normal condition. Very frequently
horse owners use an increased weight of shoe on forefeet as a remedy
for this fault, which is a palpable error, as undue weight is one
of the exciting causes. Rounding off the toes of the front shoes
has a tendency to enable a horse to raise his feet from the ground
more quickly, and is an aid. It is well, however, not to resort to
artificial measures more than necessary. It is best, in fact, to keep
the feet in as natural a condition as the circumstances of the case
will permit. But in order to overcome forging in some horses, either
as a temporary or permanent expedient, the principle to pursue is to
encourage slow or dwelling movement of the hind feet, in order to
allow the fore ones to get out of their way.

The most effectual way of doing this is to raise the toes of the hind
feet and lower the heels. The toes can be raised either by thickening
the shoe at the toe or putting on a toe piece. Allowing the toes of
the hind hoofs to grow long is an aid, and gives opportunity for
setting the shoes back, so as to do away with or lessen the noise of
“clicking.”

“Forging” is not an unsoundness, but it is a defect or fault, as bad
action is.




        INTERFERING, STRIKING, CUTTING OR BRUSHING IN HORSES


Of the many faults, accidents or habits to which horseflesh is heir,
“interfering” is one of the most troublesome. Fortunately, however,
it is one that admits of a large measure of prevention, and the
ill-effects of it can, to a very considerable extent, be overcome.
In the consideration of this subject, one of the most important
points to thoroughly study is the causes. Of the somewhat numerous
influences which contribute to this fault, defective conformation is
a very important one in predisposing to it. It is important from the
fact that cases that are largely the result of defective formation
are the most difficult to successfully cope with. A horse of perfect
formation of limbs should raise, advance and put down his feet
approximately in a straight line in the walk or trot. Any deviation
inwards from the straight line renders him liable to strike if any
exciting cause is brought into operation.

Narrow horses, particularly if they are leggy, are apt to go close
both behind and in front, and consequently to “brush.” Those that
“toe-out” either in the hind or fore extremities, usually wind
inwards in progression, and are consequently apt to interfere. In
fact, there is no formation of limb that so strongly predisposes
to this fault, in its most aggravated form, as the defect just
mentioned. Horses as a rule that “toe-in” in the fore limbs, wind
outwards, and consequently show no disposition to “brush.” In such
cases the “turning-in” of the toes is due to the position in which
the leg is fixed on to the body. It is due to the back part of the
leg showing a tendency to turn outwards from the body. This can
be most clearly observed at the elbow, where the point inclines
outwards. “Toeing-in,” however, is not always the result of a
malposition of the limb throughout, for sometimes the deformity is
confined to that portion of it from the fetlock down, constituting
what might be called a “club-foot.” This formation often predisposes
to “striking” to a marked degree, as in progression the foot comes
very close to the opposite limb. In spite of the predisposition many
horses show to interfering, from defective formation, such horses may
be seen working month after month without inflicting any injury to
themselves.

Horses that are in good condition, well balanced in going, and
that have complete power of co-ordinating the movements of their
limbs, are the ones that are likely to escape the not infrequent
consequences of defective formation of limb. The exciting causes of
interfering are numerous, but the one most frequently heard spoken
of is defective shoeing, and it is no doubt sometimes a cause, but
not nearly so frequently as is sometimes supposed. The unfortunate
shoer is frequently maligned for what is no fault of his. It does not
matter how some horses are shod, or whether they are shod or not,
they will interfere under some circumstances.

The best that we can do in the way of shoeing is to use a good,
rational shoe, properly applied on a suitably prepared foot. Too
heavy a shoe will sometimes act as a cause from the excessive weight
taxing the muscular control of the limb unduly, so that during quick
movements and sharp turns, “striking” is particularly apt to occur.
Leaving the hoofs too large is sometimes a cause, from the simple
consequence of its bringing the hoof closer to the opposite leg.
Not only that, but the increased length of toe resulting from too
large a hoof intensifies the tendency to winding either in or out in
progression, and consequently increases the tendency to “cut.”

The first step, then, in the attempt to prevent striking, is to
reduce the wall to reasonable dimensions with the rasp. Defects
of the form and direction of hoof may sometimes be remedied in
a measure; as, for instance, in a horse that “toes-out,” shorten
the outer part of the toe to a greater extent than the inner. The
tendency of this is not only to correct the unsightliness of the
deformity, but also to remedy its ill-consequence in progression.
The same may be done, but just in the opposite way, in horses which
“toe-in.” In the hind legs it is generally the inner part of the
toe of the hoof that inflicts the injury. This can be rasped so as
to reduce its convex form to an approach to a straight line with
the rasp, which lessens somewhat the danger. The shoe should be of
reasonable weight, strong enough to keep it from breaking, and set
in as much as possible on the inside without running too much risk
of bruising the sole. Have the inside branch of the shoe narrow and
rounded, so that there will be as little danger of inflicting injury
as possible. The nails may also be withheld from the inside of the
toe, so that no injury may be done from the clinches. It is a good
plan to also shorten the inside of the hoof more than the outside and
compensate for this by deepening the inside branch of the shoe, so as
to keep the foot level and have even bearing. The inside branch of
the shoe may be made almost straight from the toe back, and the hoof
made to correspond pretty much in form. The following out of this
plan of shoeing will minimize the likelihood of injury being done by
striking.

The weighting of the shoe on the outside is often recommended by
having the outer branch considerably heavier than the inner one, with
the idea that the weight on the outside makes a horse go wider. This
would, no doubt, be the tendency, and provided it does not increase
the weight of the shoe too much, there is no objection to it.

Another plan sometimes followed is to raise the inside of the foot
higher than the outside, with the idea that the fetlock of the leg on
the ground will be thrown outwards, and thus be more likely to escape
injury from the opposite foot. This plan is irrational, from the fact
that it causes a horse to tread unevenly, and thus tends to result in
injury to some other part of the leg, disturbing the relations of the
various parts that make up the weight-bearing column.

In the front legs a three-quarter shoe is sometimes used, the shoe
only coming half way round on the inside, and not covering the
ground surface of the inner quarter. The difficulty about this plan
is getting the shoe so applied that all the wall will bear its
normal amount of weight. It doesn’t do to leave the inner quarter
unsupported, for in that case there will be tilting of the leg
inwards when the foot is put on the ground, or, in other words,
uneven treading, with the ill-consequences already explained.

Charlier shoes sometimes do very well and are much safer than a
three-quarter shoe. This is a light, narrow-webbed shoe, that only
comes half way round on either side of the hoof and is sunken into a
groove cut out of the plantar surface of the wall, so that the lower
surface of it is just flush with the quarters that are not grooved
out. By this plan there is an even bearing all round the hoof, a
light shoe, and one no more likely to cause injury to the opposite
leg than the natural unshod hoof. The drawback about this shoe for
general use on hard roads is that it has not strength enough to form
a substantial stay to the hoof. It also lessens the action, and
horses are apt to go sore with them on very hard roads.

It is questionable if we have a much better device for shoeing
interfering horses than the rubber pads now so generally in use in
cities. Their use has a tendency to prevent interfering by virtue of
their effect in preventing slipping, which is one of the exciting
causes of this trouble. In the hind legs, where “cutting” is most
usual, the inner and back part of the fetlock is the common seat of
injury. Occasionally in horses with a good deal of hock action, they
will strike the leg higher up, and in very low, close-going horses
the inside of the coronet is scraped.

In the front legs the injury may be anywhere from the fetlock to
the knee. When it is high up it generally gets the designation of
speedy-cut. Another cause of “striking” is fatigue. It has already
been pointed out that when a horse has not perfect control of his
legs he is apt to “brush,” so that horses that have not had regular
work and good feed for a length of time, or, in other words, are not
in good condition, are easily fatigued and consequently liable to
interfere.

The uneven footing of rough roads, slippery roads or pavements, the
swaying of a two-wheeler, are all circumstances likely to interfere
with a horse’s equilibrium, and consequently are not infrequently
exciting causes of “striking.”

Another very fertile exciting cause, particularly in cities, and
one which, strange to say, is never referred to in print, is the
influence of discomfort in connection with the mouth in causing
“interfering.” There is nothing that puts a horse out of balance more
completely than anything wrong with his mouth. Horses that cross
their jaws, open their mouths, put their tongues out or over their
bits, carry their heads sideways, fuss with their bits, slobber,
pull, etc., or “pull out” or “crowd” in double harness, generally
have some soreness of the mouth caused by their bits, and, if they
are at all predisposed, are very apt to “cut.” We see examples of
this every day in cities where dealers get horses from the country
that have been chiefly used to snaffle bits. They at once begin to
drive them with curb bits, and they nearly all show some discomfort
at the change in the various ways already mentioned. It is very
common to see a horse cut his legs badly, under such circumstances,
that showed no evidence of ever having struck before. The treatment
of “interfering” resolves itself largely into methods of prevention.
The most important point is to remove the cause, where practicable,
and if not, to endeavor to neutralize its operation as much as
possible.

If a horse is in danger of “striking” himself on account of the
mouth not being in proper order, or from any other exciting cause
remaining in operation, protect the part or parts that are likely to
be injured, with a boot. If any part is injured from “cutting,” keep
that part protected until it has entirely recovered from the effects
of the injury.

In a large majority of cases after a horse is in good condition, his
mouth well made, and he is properly shod, there will be no need for
boots, unless he is subjected to some exciting cause, or unless he is
markedly predisposed from defective formation.




                          THE HORSE’S MOUTH


The discussion of the subject of the horse’s mouth has been prompted
by observing the thoughtlessness and carelessness of otherwise good
horsemen and lovers of horseflesh with regard to the horse’s mouth.
If a horse has a sore mouth he manifests it in some way unpleasant
to his driver or rider, but it is rarely that an examination of that
organ is made in order to determine the nature and extent of the
trouble. Such an examination is not difficult to make by one at all
accustomed to the handling of horses, and can be made as follows:
Take the horse into a place in which the light is good. To examine
the near side of the mouth, pass the left hand into the off side of
it, grasp the tongue gently, and pull it a little to one side--it is
not necessary to pull it out of the mouth--in order to expose the
branch of the lower jaw, or bar, as it is sometimes called. The thumb
of the right hand should be placed in the roof of the mouth so as
to separate the jaws, when the part that the mouthpiece of the bit
presses on can be easily scrutinized. The other side can be examined
in the same manner by using the hands in the opposite way.

The soreness, however, is not always confined to the bars of the
lower jaw, the result of the pressure of the bit, for it is not
infrequently found that the lining membrane of the cheeks is
excoriated by the bit forcibly pressing the cheeks against the
anterior grinders. This form of injury is seldom found in a horse
that readily bends his head upon his neck or “gets his nose in,”
as it is often expressed, unless it is from the use of tight
pulley-bridoon bearing reins, which is almost certain to cause it,
particularly if a horse bores on it. In the majority of instances
it is where a jointed or snaffle bit is used, when a horse “takes
hold,” and in the case of one not inclined to “bend,” that the lining
of the cheeks is injured. It can be readily understood, where a
jointed bit is used on a horse that does not get his nose in, that
when force is exerted upon the reins, it presses the cheeks directly
against the teeth, and we can at once realize the great liability to
injury of the soft and sensitive cheeks when pressed between two hard
bodies, such as an iron bit and unyielding teeth, which frequently
have sharp projecting hooks and angles at the very point at which
pressure is brought to bear. Horses driven with tight over-checks are
particularly subject to this form of injury to the mouth, as can be
understood from the explanation already given. In horses that cannot
be made to get their noses in, in riding or driving, and which show
evidence of soreness of the mouth in the lining of the cheeks, the
front grinders should be kept as smooth as possible. It is impossible
for a horse to have a pleasant responsive mouth when the pressure
comes upon the cheeks. Nature evidently intended the yielding lower
jaw to bear the pressure of the bit, with the soft and elastic tongue
to aid in avoiding injury to the sensitive structure which covers the
branches of that jaw. Many horses which do not bend their heads upon
their necks, when used with a snaffle bit can be made to get their
noses in with a curb, which is consequently, when rationally used,
the more humane and also the much more effectual in promoting style
and action. Occasionally, however, one finds that a horse goes better
in a snaffle than in any other kind of bit unless it is one with a
smooth and slightly curved, unjointed mouthpiece.

In addition to those already referred to there are many other
ill-results from sore mouths, and among the more serious of these are
the restless and irritable habits horses develop when being ridden
or driven out of the stable, such as going off with a rush, rearing,
plunging and balking. A great deal depends upon the sensitiveness
of the individual as to the manner in which he shows his restiveness
and irritability when with a sore mouth again facing the bit. A horse
of a good, mild temperament may do nothing but show a hesitation in
going into the bit and if in double harness hang back for a time,
or he will not go up with his mate. Others will go sideways, cross
their jaws, press on one side of the bit, or toss their heads in
an irritable manner that makes it almost impossible to guide them.
High-strung, nervous, determined horses may show their irritability
in the more dangerous manner of rushing, plunging or rearing. Drivers
of horses are sometimes very much astonished to find a previously
well-mannered horse go off with a rush, rear or plunge, but it is
remarkable how seldom they think of looking to the mouth to find out
the cause for the unexpected display of ill-manners, when in the
majority of instances it is to be found there. Even when the lips
are tinged with blood from the injured lining membrane it is seldom
that an examination is made to determine the extent of the injury.
Frequently when an injury to the mouth is pointed out to an owner it
is thought lightly of, the extreme sensitiveness of that organ not
being realized.

Pinches, abrasions and cracks about the commissures of the lips
usually attract attention because they are easily observed, but they
really, as a rule, do not cause nearly the amount of irritation and
pain that an internal injury to the mouth does, and they are easily
prevented by the use of a circular leather cheek piece on the bit.
Some horses that show a disinclination to go into the bit for the
first mile or two, after a time begin to pull, and the farther they
are driven the more they pull. This is usually the result of a sore
mouth, and veterinarians frequently have to remove small portions of
bone which have been detached from the jaw by the extreme pressure
of the bit. Bad “side-liners” are caused by a chipped jaw or else
an extensive excoriation of the soft tissues on one side of the
mouth where the bit exerts its pressure. In the healing up of such
injuries the tissue with which nature repairs the breach seldom
seems to attain the ability to stand the pressure of the bit to the
same extent that one not so severely injured does. The fact that
such permanent ill-effects are apt to follow injuries to the mouth
from the bit should cause the exercise of due care when there is any
evidence of soreness. Certainly high-couraged, ambitious horses are
predisposed to injuries of the mouth, but they can be largely guarded
against by the exercise of care, and it is very important never to
disregard “soreness,” however slight.

There is probably no animal in which a bad habit is more apt to
become confirmed than the horse, and the restless, irritable habits
he is liable to develop on leaving the stable are among the most
disagreeable. Some horses do not what is called “settle down” when
first driven out, but either prance, hop or canter for a varying
distance. This is generally accounted for by the owner as being
evidence that the animal in question is “feeling too well,” or, in
other words, is suffering from an exuberance of spirits. This may be
the cause, but in the large majority of cases it is attributable to
uneasiness in connection with the mouth. Sometimes this discomfort
may not be the result of absolute soreness, as a change of bit may
cause it. It may be noticed in an otherwise well broken horse where
a curb bit is first substituted for a snaffle, particularly if it
is placed too low in the mouth and if, as very often happens, the
tongue is put over it, in which case a horse is very unlikely to go
steadily, and his mouth is almost sure to get sore in a very short
time.

The placing of the bit in a horse’s mouth is a very important matter
in influencing his manner of going. Some horsemen say there is one
proper position for a bit in a horse’s mouth and that it should
always be placed in that position. My experience is that this is best
determined by experiment with each individual, and one can tell, by
driving or riding a horse a few minutes, as to where the bit should
be placed in his mouth. It is usually best to place it rather high at
first, particularly when changing to a curb bit, but if he keeps his
tongue under it and does not respond readily to pressure, lower it as
much as he will stand without showing restlessness. The lower the bit
in the mouth, within certain limits, the better, provided the horse
will keep his tongue under it and not fuss with it, and face it with
a reasonable degree of firmness.

How frequently we see horses go off their feet when going well
within their speed at the trot. Sometimes this is the result of
excitability, but in nine cases out of ten it is due to a feeling of
discomfort or want of confidence in connection with the mouth. Very
often this is caused by the arrangement of the curb in giving too
much leverage, especially if the hands of the driver are not good.
Some horses that go unsteadily with the reins in the bar will go much
better in the half-check, or it may be in the plain check, but very
often the breaking at the trot is due to an injured mouth. Horse
owners sometimes endeavor to overcome this tendency to breaking by
giving long drives, and fatigue will temporarily overcome it as a
rule, but there are horses that go unsteadily when almost jaded. This
tendency can usually be overcome in a moderately worked horse if the
bitting is made comfortable for him and the soreness of the mouth
relieved.

Soreness of the mouth is by no means an uncommon one among the
exciting causes of “interfering” and may frequently be observed
even in well broken horses when a change of bit, particularly a
change to a severe one, has produced some injury to the mouth.
Fatigue, bad shoeing, rough or slippery roads, and the swaying of
a heavy two-wheeler are all exciting causes of “striking,” and the
awkwardness arising from an imperfectly made (not thoroughly bitted)
mouth, with the incidental soreness, is an important factor.

Driving green horses in double harness is a very fertile cause of
sore mouths. There are undoubted advantages in handling green horses
in double harness, particularly shy, nervous ones, as the break horse
inspires confidence in the green one and he is more easily controlled
if badly frightened; but one can make more rapid progress in making
a mouth in single harness, or in the saddle, than in double harness,
for the opportunity of humoring it is better, and there is only one
temper to consider. Trainers of green horses usually change the side
horses are driven on every day, which is a good plan, as it tends
to make them drive straight; but it is a tacit acknowledgment that
there is more or less soreness of the mouth.

If the mouth is bruised or excoriated on the portion of the bars
of the lower jaw where the bit presses, keep the bit out of it, if
possible, until it heals. This need not prevent the horse being
exercised, for if a suitable place is available, he can be lunged a
sufficient time daily to keep him in condition and under control. The
lunging line can be buckled in the noseband of the halter, and no
bit need be used. If a suitable place for lunging is not available
and it is necessary to lead the horse alongside of another that is
ridden, it can be done without the use of a bit by using a tightly
applied standing martingale, made with a headpiece and attached to
a girth that is kept in its place by a crupper. The headline should
be attached to the noseband of the headstall. In some instances
changing to a bit that exerts its pressure so as not to interfere
with the sore part will answer, as, for instance, the substitution of
a snaffle for a Liverpool; but in most instances it is better to keep
the bit out of the mouth altogether until it heals. When the mouth
is sufficiently healed to stand the pressure of the bit again it is
a very necessary precaution before driving for the first few times
to take the sharp edge off the spirit of the horse by lunging him
so that the sore part will not be so likely to be reinjured by the
animal’s “taking hold.”

It is well to emphasize what has already been stated, that the front
grinders should be kept in condition, so that they can inflict no
injury to the cheeks, by having them thoroughly beveled or rounded
off with the tooth rasp. This does no harm, provided it is done in a
rational way, and is frequently of much benefit in preventing injury
to the lining of the cheeks.




                         TURNING HORSES OUT


In the large Eastern cities the practice of horse owners turning
all or some of their horses out for a portion of the year is a very
common one. Consequently it is an important matter for them to study
this question from every standpoint. For instance, is it wise to turn
a horse out if he is going sound, and is in good working condition?
Many owners express themselves and act as if it were a benefit to a
horse to be thrown into complete idleness at intervals for a time.
Others do it with the object of saving expense. Mr. C. J. Hamlin,
of Buffalo, whom everybody knows as a gentleman of long experience
and also as one of good judgment in horse matters, is said to have
given expression to the following aphorism, viz., that “two let-ups
are as bad as a break-down.” This statement may be considered rather
an exaggeration by some, but those who have had an opportunity for
fully observing the effects of “turning out” on horseflesh will
agree that there is a large measure of truth in it. If you throw a
horse into complete or comparative idleness for any length of time,
every active tissue of the body becomes relaxed and incapable of
standing anything like severe work. The tendons and ligaments lose
their strength, the muscular fibres their tone, the nervous system
its power of supplying energy for any lengthened exertion. The
relaxing effect of idleness on muscular fibre is well exemplified in
connection with the circulation. Take, for instance, a saddle-horse
that has been carrying 200 pounds on his back every day all winter
and well into the spring, with impunity. The owner is going abroad
for three months and turns his horse out. When he comes back he
thinks that his horse has had a long rest, and should therefore carry
him particularly well. In a short time, however, the horse begins to
show signs of fatigue by dropping his head, going heavy in hand, and
very likely by “forging.”

The next morning the owner goes to look at him and finds he backs out
stiffly, and is more or less swollen about the fetlocks, and his feet
may feel a little warmer than usual. He is suffering from muscular
soreness, the tissues about the fetlocks are congested, the coats of
the blood-vessels in the extremities have not tone enough to return
the blood with proper force to the heart, so there is stagnation of
a portion of it in the dependent parts. That delicate and intricate
network of blood-vessels in the feet, from long and comparative
inactivity, cannot carry on their function with integrity, so we get
congestion and consequent stiffness and shortening of the gait.

“Ah, but,” someone explains, “this is only temporary. If you bandage
his legs, give him laxative food and light walking exercise for a
few days he will be all right again.” The chances are he will, but
two or three days’ work have been lost, and if you then subject him
to the same course you will very likely have a repetition of the
condition. Yes, and it will be several weeks and more likely months
before he is in as good condition to stand work as he was before he
went out. During all these weeks or months that have been spent in
reconditioning, the muscles, ligaments and tendons are more or less
soft and consequently susceptible to strains of varying intensity
which may necessitate lying up for treatment. It is not only strains
we have to fear, but the comparative inactivity of the circulation
during rest renders the legs and feet subject to congestion and
inflammation at various susceptible points when abruptly called into
activity in doing hard work.

No doubt, by taking time and bringing a horse gradually into work he
can be restored to good condition, but to do this there is required
management, some expense and tantalizing delay.

When owners are not prepared to bring their horses gradually back
into condition, they will soon have stale-legged and lame horses.
One or two seasons of “turning out” and bringing up and abruptly
putting into work will often transform a valuable, sound horse into
a “screw.” Although the legs and feet are the parts that suffer most
from this treatment, a horse shows it also in his “top,” for it takes
a long while to bring back the bloom and finish that go with good
condition, after being turned out.

Of course it is a problem for many owners difficult to solve
satisfactorily, what to do with their horses when they go away for
three months, particularly those horses that are practically sound
and in good working condition. It is such an easy solution of the
problem to turn them out at some good farm, where they will be
sufficiently fed, and kept in safety in a loose box and have a run
in a paddock, and only cost fifteen dollars per month apiece. The
question is: Wouldn’t it pay better to give thirty dollars and have
the horses kept in condition, so that they are ready to work as soon
as their owners need them? When we come to consider the danger,
loss of time, and wear and tear incidental to reconditioning, we
must emphatically answer, yes. In the above remarks we have only
considered this question from the standpoint of horses that are
practically sound and in good condition, but it is quite another
matter when we have to deal with horses that are run down from
overwork and other unfavorable conditions, or with pavement-sore and
lame horses.

In horses that are run down comparative idleness is almost
imperative, and there is nothing much better than a run in a good,
shady, well-watered pasture in the early summer, before the flies get
too bad. In that way they get the gentle exercise they voluntarily
take and get the advantage of the alterative effect that good, fresh
grass has upon the system. This, too, is good treatment for slightly
pavement-sore horses, particularly if the pasture land is not too
dry. Lame horses are, in almost all cases, benefited by rest, and if
it is necessary that the rest shall be at all prolonged, the most
economical and favorable place to treat them is in a loose box in the
country. A horse is bound to get out of condition, anyway, if resting
for lameness, and he is usually better in the country, getting lots
of pure air and sufficient space for comfort. The beneficial effects
of treatment and rest must be followed up by a very gradual process
of reconditioning after the lameness has subsided, otherwise the
lameness will be apt to recur.




                          IMPROVING ACTION

           BITTING, SHOEING AND CONDITIONING FOR ACTION--I


Horses that have a tendency to show action can undoubtedly have it
very much increased by the adoption of a proper system of training,
but there are many without this inclination which it is hopeless
to develop to a degree that makes it worth while spending time
and effort on them. The influence which contributes most to the
development of action is bitting. This requires knowledge, time and
patience. Some horses’ mouths are much more easily made than others,
and there are some it is almost hopeless to try to make anything like
perfect. A good mouth is a responsive one. Pressure from both reins
should cause the head to bend readily on the neck, while that from
either near or off-rein should cause correspondingly prompt flexion.
There are some horses that it is almost impossible to bend, owing to
the defective anatomical relations of the head and neck, and unless
they naturally have a lot of action, they are not likely, even in
the best hands, ever to show very much. A horse with his head well
put on his neck, that has a responsive mouth and some ambition, will,
when urged, get his head up and nose in, and if restrained at the
same time by moderate pressure of the bit, will step much higher than
if he has a free head when going at the same rate of speed. Some
horses, when going fast, show a considerable amount of action, that
at a slow pace will exhibit very little. If such horses have their
mouths well cultivated, so that when restrained their force will be
exerted to step up instead of stepping on, their action, in front at
least, will be much increased. If, however, a horse’s mouth is not
cultivated to a proper degree of responsiveness, and he is urged into
the bit, he will lug or bore and go ahead instead of going up.

To those who are anxious, then, to develop action in their horses,
the first step is to endeavor to cultivate a responsive mouth. As has
been stated, this requires time and skill. Many horses’ mouths are
frequently permanently injured by insufficient time being taken for
this process. It is a very similar one to teaching a child to write.
The tyro at writing cannot regulate the movements of his hand and arm
so as to make smooth and regular lines in an easy, flowing manner.
The nerves and muscles of his hand and arm have to be cultivated by
degrees to be able to accomplish this. So with the horse’s mouth; the
nerves of it have to be educated to make prompt and easy response
to pressure, and the muscles, acting under the influence of the
nerves, have to be strengthened and developed, so that the head
can be bent on the neck and properly carried without discomfort to
the individual. The head should not only be bent on the neck to a
reasonable degree, but should also be steadily carried.

The first step in the process of making a horse’s mouth is to get
him used to the pressure of the bit without showing restlessness.
No pressure should be brought to bear upon the tongue by means of
the reins until the horse will stand a bit in his mouth without
fussing. The bit should be placed sufficiently high in the mouth,
so that there is no temptation for the horse to get his tongue over
it. The old-fashioned plan of putting a big, thick bit, with keys
hanging from it, placed low in the mouth, is entirely erroneous, as
it gets the colt into the way of fussing with his tongue all the
time, which is a habit to be avoided. In a good mouth, if the horse
is comfortable, his tongue lies quietly in the groove formed by
the branches of the lower jaw, and acts as a protective cushion in
preventing injury to the delicate and sensitive covering of the bars
and the bars themselves. If, then, through faulty management, the
tongue is not by degrees trained to stand the pressure of the bit,
the horse is sure to develop some irritable habit with that organ,
such as putting it over the bit, drawing it up in the mouth, or
“lolling” it. The result of the two former habits is that the bars of
the jaw lose the protection of the tongue and become exposed to the
pressure of the bit, which they cannot stand without suffering pain
and injury. Consequently the mouth becomes very unsteady, loses its
responsiveness, and the horse is put off his balance, so that he is
apt to go off his feet, hitch, and go cornerwise instead of straight.

Putting the tongue over the bit and retracting it in the mouth
has the further ill-effect of making a horse show irritability in
a variety of ways, such as crossing the jaws, carrying the head
sideways, throwing the head up, keeping the mouth open, slobbering,
frequent movement of the head instead of a steady carriage of it,
which is so important in conducing to a responsive mouth. Putting the
tongue over the bit soon becomes habitual with some horses, and it is
quite a difficult matter to remedy effectually. Spoon bits and all
such mechanical contrivances to prevent it are very unsatisfactory,
as a horse is never comfortable with them, and never carries a steady
head with any of them in his mouth. It can, however, be cured by
gradually getting a horse used to the presence and pressure of the
bit on his tongue. Putting the tongue over the bit becomes such a
confirmed habit that some horses will do it as soon as the bit is
put in the mouth and before any pressure whatever is brought to bear
on the tongue by the bit. This aggravated form of the habit can be
remedied by using an ordinary ring bit with a straight mouthpiece.
This should be placed high in the mouth, so that it is impossible to
put the tongue over it, and left in all day except when the horse is
feeding. In two or three weeks’ time the horse will become accustomed
to keeping his tongue in its proper position with respect to the bit
and stop trying to get it over.

This, however, is only the first step, and the next and most
important one is to get the tongue used to pressure. To accomplish
this, attach reins to the bit and buckle them to a roller at the
withers. For some time they must be left very loose, so that the
bit will exert no pressure unless the horse extends his nose beyond
its usual position. In this way he will be brought to experience,
by degrees, a little pressure on the tongue. For a time he should
be lunged daily with the reins loose, so that he will get used to
the presence and occasional pressure of the bit when in motion. Very
gradually indeed the reins may be tightened, so that after some weeks
the subject may gradually be brought to stand moderate pressure on
the tongue, and by still slower degrees may the bit be lowered in the
mouth until it reaches the lowest position the individual will stand
and still keep his tongue in place and carry his head steadily. Very
great vigilance must be exercised to see that the tongue never goes
over; if it does so by any chance, immediately raise the bit, and
lessen the pressure.

When sufficient progress has been made, as evidenced by the ability
of the tongue to stand pressure when the subject is in motion, he
may be ridden or driven. A rider with good hands can accomplish
much in cultivating the mouth and can humor it so that the horse
may gradually be brought to stand pressure. It is better to use the
horse in single harness than in double, as his mouth can be better
humored where there is only one temper and mouth to consider. The
necessity for getting the tongue used to standing the pressure of the
bit cannot be too much emphasized, but of course there is a limit
to this, and some horses that are lacking in sensitiveness will
stand pressure on their tongues until they become black and blue,
thoroughly dried up in some cases, projected from the mouth, and the
mouth kept more or less open. The most important exciting cause of
this fault is placing the bit so high in the mouth that the horse
will not bend his head upon his neck in response to the pressure of
the bit. All this may be overcome in many instances by lowering the
bit an inch or two in the mouth, when pressure of the bit will cause
responsive giving of the jaw and thus relieve the tongue of undue
pressure.

A horse should never be allowed to go with his mouth open, as it
becomes dried, which lessens the sensitiveness and responsiveness of
that organ and encourages pulling. If a horse shows a tendency to
keep his mouth open, try to determine the cause, as it is sure to
be due to some discomfort in connection with the mouth. In addition
to removing the cause, any tendency to this fault should be checked
by the use of a tight noseband. The mouth must be kept closed, as
a horse never goes nicely with it open. Although faulty mouths are
usually the result of careless, thoughtless, unskilful management, it
must be acknowledged that there is a decided predisposition in some
horses to what are called bad mouths. When this tendency does exist,
however, it can usually be overcome by rational management and a
pleasant, valuable, useful horse kept from becoming an uncomfortable
brute, much lessened in value from the possession of a bad mouth.

The horse with a small tongue and narrow, sharp bars, is apt to be
very sensitive to pressure and easily made to develop irritability
and unsteadiness of the mouth; but if he is taken cautiously and
carefully with easy bits, and gradually brought to stand pressure, he
is likely to develop a delightfully responsive mouth. Some horses,
on the other hand, have thick, leathery tongues, which it is almost
impossible to make responsive, owing to their lack of sensitiveness.
This inherent lack of sensitiveness of mouth is occasionally
associated with a corresponding lack of sensitiveness of the skin,
so that the horse does not feel the whip. I have had experience with
individuals of that sort that were free-goers and determined pullers,
in which there was something evidently lacking in the nerves of
sensation. Cases are, of course, exceptional, where there seems to be
a general lack of sensation, but it is not so rare to find a leathery
mouth.

In addition to the hyper-sensitiveness of the mouth in some horses
and the lack of sensitiveness in others, necessitating unusual care
in making their mouths, some horses have anatomical defects which
preclude the possibility of them ever having anything like perfect
mouths. Those with necks below of a length disproportionate to the
length of the necks above, particularly if such necks are deep at
their points of attachment to the head, it is impossible for the head
to be bent upon the neck so that the mouth may be responsive. A horse
formed in this way is bound to stick his nose out, and when pressure
is brought to bear upon the lower jaw with the bit it slips up in the
mouth towards the grinders, and does not exert leverage upon the jaw
at a place of vantage or so that the head can be bent upon the neck.
As a rule, ewe-necked horses show this inability, but not all, by any
means, for some of them are clean-cut in the throttle, and the neck
just above the throttle is light, so that it can bend with ease.

In addition to the causes already explained, temperament predisposes
to pulling. A free, courageous, determined horse is much more apt to
get into the way of pulling than one not over-burdened with energy.
Of the exciting causes of pulling, insufficient work and over-feeding
are important; but really the most fruitful one is the unskilful and
heavy-handed driver. Some drivers will make almost any horse pull.
Many have no sympathy with a horse, and if they do observe evidences
of discomfort in connection with the mouth, which may be shown in
some of the ways already explained, they do not endeavor to remove
the cause. It is most important in bitting horses to prevent them
from getting into bad habits of any kind. They get into bad habits
very quickly, which it may take a long time to eradicate. The most
rational principle to proceed on is not to allow them to learn bad
habits. Do not place them in a position to learn bad habits.




                          IMPROVING ACTION

          BITTING, SHOEING AND CONDITIONING FOR ACTION--II


In my last article on this subject I drew attention to the fact that
bitting, or “making the mouth,” is by far the most important matter
to attend to in contributing to action. You must get the head up and
the nose in, and cultivate a responsive mouth, so that when a horse
is urged and restrained, he will step up instead of stepping on.
It was urged that care should be used against getting horses into
bad habits in connection with the mouth in the process of bitting,
such as getting the tongue over the bit, retracting the tongue,
side-lining, going with the mouth open, tossing the head, carrying
the head unsteadily, and so forth. If some of these habits are
developed, they will tend to neutralize any beneficial efforts that
have been made in the cultivation of the mouth.

An easy bit should first be used, such as a straight-barred ringed
one or a snaffle, so that the colt will face it firmly and carry
a steady head. In the development of speed, it is also imperative
to use an easy bit, but for the production of style and action, a
curb bit is almost indispensable for the majority of horses. The
inexperienced ones are apt to think that a curb bit is an instrument
of torture. The ignorant, thoughtless and rough handler of horses
can easily make it so, but if it is properly used it is really more
humane for use in many mouths, than a less severe one. The curb bit
gives very much increased leverage, and will make some horses bend
that cannot be made to do so without it. As soon as they bend, it
requires very little force to keep their noses in, and very little
pressure need be exerted, so that there is no injury nor irritation
resulting. In addition to this, the pressure is divided between the
interior and exterior of the mouth, the curb chain exerting its share
of the pressure just behind the lower lip.

Some free, courageous horses, especially if short of work, will
pull to a most uncomfortable extent, both to themselves and their
drivers, if driven with a snaffle bit. The same horses, if used with
curbs, will go without taking hold, and with the exertion on the
part of their drivers of very slight restraining force. The perfect
handling of a horse with a curb bit is a very fine art, by which are
produced the perfection of carriage and the maximum of style and
action. To realize fully what the perfect handling of a curb bit
means in promoting style and action, one has only to observe a horse
skilfully handled with one, especially if he has a good mouth. The
dexterous rider or driver brings out all the responsiveness there
is in the horse without causing him to fight, while the unskilful
handler allows a horse to carry himself imperfectly and gets him off
his balance, thereby lessening his gracefulness, style and action.
The change from a snaffle to a curb bit should be made carefully and
discreetly, as it takes a horse some time to get used to the change.
We have good opportunities in the city of observing the ill-effects
of the abrupt change. A dealer gets in from the country a horse that
is possibly well broken, but has never had a curb bit in his mouth.
He hitches the horse, puts a curb bit in his mouth, and “pulls him
together,” as it is expressed; that is, he urges him with the whip
and restrains him to get all the style and action he can out of him.
He is very much encouraged to see his new purchase make such a good
showing. The next day he puts the horse in harness, but finds that
he does not go so well, showing irritability in connection with
his mouth. The horse may hold his head sideways, open his mouth
more or less, put his tongue over the bit, toss his head or carry
it unsteadily, pull, hitch, go off his feet, or interfere. He may
display any one or a combination of these faults, showing that he is
uncomfortable and out of balance.

Why this quick alteration in the manner of going between the first
and second hitching? It is simply due to the fact that the delicate
tissues of the mouth have become bruised or abraded from the rough
handling of a bit with powerful leverage. The horse’s mouth is sore,
and he cannot face the bit without showing irritability, which he
manifests in the ways described. The curb bit feels different in
his mouth, the pressure on the tongue is greater, and if the curb
chain is tightened and reins buckled to the bit, so as to give
much leverage, many horses will chafe under the newly experienced
increased restraint, and will pull, thereby greatly increasing the
injury to the mouth. If this is repeated, the mouth is spoiled and
bad habits produced.

In getting a horse accustomed to the curb bit, it is a good plan to
let him stand with it in his mouth in the stable for a few hours a
day. This gets him used to the shape and size of the new bit, after
which pressure can by degrees be brought to bear on it. Some trainers
are opposed to the use of a dumb jockey. Of course, the mouth cannot
be perfected by the use of this device alone, but it is a very useful
auxiliary to other measures. The dumb jockey is a rubber contrivance
attached to a girth and crupper and with elastic reins to buckle
to the bit. The prejudice against it is largely the result of the
irrational manner in which it is used. In the majority of instances
the reins are buckled too tightly at first, causing too much pressure
on the mouth, and forcing the head and neck into an unnaturally
constrained position. This, instead of cultivating responsiveness of
the mouth, causes irritation of that organ, gets a horse into fussy
habits, and makes him lie on the bit, doing more harm than good.
One not infrequently sees a horse standing in a stall with a dumb
jockey on him, his mouth partly open, his tongue over the bit, and
boring down on it, and sweating profusely from the discomfort he is
suffering. A dumb jockey used in this way is worse than useless. One
of the objects of using a jockey is to get the nose in, and from the
manner in which it is used by many it is evident that they seek to
accomplish this by sheer mechanical force, forgetting that they are
training nerves and muscles to responsiveness, which can only be done
by degrees.

As soon as a horse shows evidence of discomfort, loosen the reins and
tighten them gradually again. If the subject draws his tongue up in
his mouth, or puts it over the bit, raise the bit in his mouth. Some
horses get their heads too low with a dumb jockey on. In such it is
of much benefit to use a bearing-rein attachment to keep their heads
in proper position. The benefit from a dumb jockey used in a stable
is enhanced by using it when a horse is in motion. Some horses will
bend when standing that will not do so when moving, and so have to
be trained to it. Beneficial as a dumb jockey may be, a rider with
good hands, that can use his legs on the horse’s sides, urging him
by degrees into proper position with hind legs well under him, and
head up and nose in, can accomplish more, as he can humor the horse
at will. Next to riding, driving in single harness is best, as it
is hardly possible to humor a horse’s mouth as well in double as in
single harness. The tendency with most trainers is to hurry matters
too much. Urging a horse into the bit too soon causes him to fuss
with his mouth and is apt to make him fight the bit. The successful
trainer needs a lot of patience and perseverance.

If, in the process of bitting, the mouth by accident gets sore,
rest it by keeping the bit out of it until it is better. This can
be accomplished in the country or in a small town, without keeping
a horse altogether out of work, by putting on the cavesson and dumb
jockey and having the reins tightly buckled to the cavesson and led
alongside of another horse in this way or lunged. It is a bad plan to
let a horse that is in the process of bitting or breaking get too
fresh, as he is apt to reinjure his mouth when he is put in harness
again.

Curb bits for driving are so made that different degrees of leverage
can be exerted. It can be laid down as a rule that it is not wise to
use anymore leverage than is essential, otherwise the mouth is apt to
become sore and carried unsteadily.

There is some diversity of opinion as to the wisdom of using bearing
reins. Some people, particularly the inexperienced, are very much
opposed to their use. Occasionally one finds a horse--much more
rarely a pair--that carries himself so well--head up, nose in and
head steady--that a bearing rein is superfluous. The majority of
horses, however, carry themselves better, drive more comfortably,
and are really more comfortable themselves when driven with bearing
reins. They can, of course, be made instruments of torture, if used
too tightly buckled up and for too long periods at a time, but most
horses will not only carry their heads too low, but bore, pull and
“duck” if not “borne up.” The low carriage of the head is not only
unsightly in a carriage horse, but causes too much weight to be
thrown on the forelegs for their welfare. The French check is very
much better than the pulley bridoon. The bearing rein should not be
used so tightly that a horse cannot bend his head upon his neck, if
he is capable of doing so. The bearing reins should seldom, if ever,
be used on the driving bit; if it is at all tight, it pulls the bit
too high in the mouth, causing a horse to bore and usually to bruise
the bars severely immediately in front of the grinders. A jointed bit
should be used in the mouth in addition to the driving bit and the
bearing rein buckled to it.

So far we have been referring to bitting only as having a
contributing influence in increasing the forward or knee action;
but it has also a marked effect in improving the hock action. It is
remarkable how much the hock action can be increased by cultivating a
responsive mouth, dropping the nose into its proper position, or, in
other words, balancing a horse.

Before we leave the subject of the mouth and bitting altogether, we
must refer to condition as an important factor in contributing to
action. Before a horse can be made to show all the action there is
in him, he must be toned up to the highest pitch. He must be full of
nervous energy, and his muscles thoroughly developed. He must not
only feel like doing it, but must also have the power. It takes time
to bring this about. The cultivation of the mouth and the toning up
of the system should proceed together, but never let the toning up
get ahead of the education of the mouth. It is better not to have a
horse feeling too well while you are cultivating his mouth, for,
if his spirits are too exuberant, he will not learn so fast, and is
apt to fight and increase his chances of developing bad habits. In
cases in which action contributes to a horse’s value, he must also
look well. Without being too gross, he should be in full flesh; it
should be well put on, and there is nothing like a lot of slow work
for this. From an hour to two hours’ walking exercise every day will
make the flesh look solid and give a finish which a horse merely
fattened up without work never shows. Slow work, if a horse gets a
sufficiency of good feed and proper grooming, will not prevent the
accumulation of flesh as fast work does, and it keeps the manners
of the individual good. The development of speed in trotting-bred
horses is a slow process with many of them. It takes several years
in some individuals to bring it to its zenith. This is in a measure
also true of action, if we look to perfecting it. A good deal can be
accomplished in a couple of months with some horses, but much more
can be attained in two years. We have examples of horses well known
in the show rings of this country to-day that have gone on improving
in brilliance of style and action for years. Bitting and conditioning
are the chief contributing factors.

The practical man who is conditioning and developing horses’ action,
for sale, is limited as to time. He cannot afford to spend it and
he has to be guided too much by circumstances, but the principle of
development is the same, whether for the market or show ring. A great
deal is said about shoeing in contributing to action, and it is a
point that should be studied and carefully attended to, but it is
decidedly secondary in importance to either bitting or conditioning.
Some years ago a great deal of weight was used in shoeing show and
sale horses. You would frequently see a horse weighing from 1,000 to
1,100 pounds carrying on each forefoot from one pound and a half to
two pounds weight, and even more. This answers for some purposes and
before some judges, but if an owner wishes to sell or show a horse on
his merits, it does not do. A lot of weight on a horse’s feet will
make him show more action for a short time, particularly if shown in
hand and if he is feeling fresh and well. If, however, he is called
upon to exert himself for any length of time, especially if the going
is heavy, and if he has to draw any weight, he will soon begin to
labor, pound the ground, very likely forge, and the character of his
action will be destroyed. With a good judge, the character of the
action is of more importance than the amount of it, and he would not
look a second time at a horse that labors and pounds, no matter how
high he goes. One has to be guided by the individual, and the object
in view in determining the amount of weight to put in a horse’s
shoes, in order to get the best results in the way of action. From 16
to 22 ounces is usually sufficient, but there are horses for which a
little less or a little more may be carried with advantage for sale
or show purposes.

In addition to carrying a moderate amount of weight, the hoofs should
be allowed to grow to a fair length. Length of toe causes a horse
to exert increased effort in raising and extending the forelegs; so
the tendency is to increase the action. Defects of action can in a
measure be corrected by modifying the shoes and form of the hoof.
For instance, some horses extend too much and do not fold or bend
their knees sufficiently, but what is called “point,” and are apt
to go on their heels, or come down heel first, instead of planting
the foot squarely, heel and toe at the same time. For this defect,
have the toes fairly short, lighten the web of the shoe at the toe,
and increase its weight gradually towards the heel. With a horse
that folds too much and does not extend sufficiently, put the weight
towards the toe and lighten the heel. In a horse that “dishes” or
“winds out,” the heavy portion of the web should be in the inside
branch; while in a horse that “winds in,” just the opposite should be
done.

In carrying out these modifications, they must be done so as not
to interfere with the level of the foot. If a horse does not tread
level, ill-results, in the shape of lameness or wear and tear of the
leg and foot, are likely to follow.




                         EXERCISE FOR HORSES


Everybody who owns or has to do with horses in any way, recognizes
that exercise is necessary for them in some way or other. Judging,
however, from the practice pursued by many persons, one cannot but
conclude that opinions differ widely as to the amount necessary, the
manner in which it should be given, the character of it, and the
circumstances which should guide one in prescribing it.

In giving the subject reasonable thought we must first of all
recognize the fact that the horse is so constituted that he is
naturally an active animal. In fact, activity is his paramount
characteristic. If from any cause he is brought to lead the
comparatively vegetable existence of the sheep or cow, his powers
become more or less impaired, temporarily though it may be.

Recognizing as we must the basic principle of a horse’s inherent
activity, we can make deductions as to his reasonable treatment
which are borne out by experience. It is not my intention to
make theoretical statements in treating of this subject, but to
endeavor to give some practical hints that may be of some use in the
everyday treatment of horses. It is not convenient to draw a line of
demarcation, in the treatment of this subject, between exercise and
work, though one might be able to define the difference to suit one’s
views.

If one were asked to explain the effects of reasonable work on
a horse’s system, one might truthfully state that there is no
healthy part of his organism that is not beneficially affected by
it. Judicious work stimulates the appetite, promotes digestion,
encourages assimilation or the conversion of food into nutritive
material. It not only has an important influence on these functions
already mentioned, but in a greater degree it aids the various
tissues of the animal to take from the blood those elements required
to restore the loss which is going on all the time, and also to
promote their growth and development. Further than that, it helps the
system to get rid of material that it has no further use for, and
which, if allowed to remain, will prove prejudicial to it.

The casual observer will almost be able to determine the change which
takes place in a horse, when not sufficiently worked, if he will
give it a little thought. If he is at all liberally fed, he will not
only retain his flesh, but will gain in weight. But what about his
muscular tissue? It apparently looks as bulky as ever. So it is and
possibly more so, but that it has become impaired in muscular power
can easily be demonstrated by an hour’s brisk work in the case of a
driving horse. He goes out full of life, and possibly shows to the
best advantage for a short time, but soon begins to drop his head,
go heavy in hand, in fact to lag, loses his action, and very likely
forges. This demonstrates the fact that, no matter how well a horse
may seem nourished, he cannot maintain his muscular tone and muscular
power without adequate work.

The changes that take place in the muscles of locomotion also take
place in the muscular tissue of other parts of the individual. The
central organ of the circulation, the heart, is a hollow muscle, and
the blood vessels have muscular fibres in their coats. If a horse
is insufficiently exercised, the muscular tissue of the heart and
blood vessels becomes impaired in power, as that of the muscles
of locomotion does. If a horse in such condition is abruptly put
to brisk work, the circulation is apt to show weakness, and there
is danger of congestive and inflammatory attacks. A horse out of
condition and lacking in muscular tone will develop congestion of the
lungs, from an amount of exertion that would have no injurious effect
upon one in moderately good condition. If the muscular tissue of
the heart is weak, that organ lacks the power under severe exertion
to force the blood through the lungs, when stagnation and congestion
follow.

Horses in the condition just described, if given a long, quick
journey on a hard road, are apt to develop founder or inflammation of
the quick of the feet in its most intense form. The circulation being
weak, the concussion resulting from the pounding on the hard road
interferes with it, and congestion and inflammation are apt to result.

The amount and the character of exercise to be given during
convalescence is an important point in influencing the hastening
of that process, as well as in determining the completeness of the
recovery and the prevention of untoward sequels. Even during sickness
the restricted and gentle movements possible in a box stall of fair
size not only contribute to the patient’s comfort by admitting of
freedom and comfortable attitudes, but the slight exercise has a
beneficial effect upon the circulation, particularly that of the legs.

After attacks of influenza, strangles, laryngitis or pneumonia,
and as soon as the temperature has regained its normal condition,
the question of exercise should be considered, and judgment should
be used in determining how soon the patient can stand exercise.
Sometimes a couple of days after the temperature has become normal
and the appetite is regained in a measure, the patient shows strength
enough in movement to justify one in concluding that he can stand
a short walk. He may be only able to stand a few minutes’ or he
may be able to stand ten minutes’ gentle leading, but usually each
succeeding day it will be found he can stand a little more. If he
can stand ten minutes a day, it is better, if possible, to divide it
into two periods of five minutes each. In my opinion this applies to
all exercise, whether that given during convalescence or conditioning
for market, for the show ring, or for the race track. Exercise rouses
the circulation, and in fact all the activities of the organism, with
beneficial results.

Much better results can be attained by stimulating the functional
activity of all the organs of the body twice in the twenty-four
hours, than once. The period of convalescence is very much shortened
by pursuing this plan, and the horse can be put to work much sooner,
and with less danger of relapse. Those in charge of horses will
often keep a convalescent one in a box stall until he gets full of
life, then hitch him up. He will be for a few minutes full of vim
and go, but will soon begin to sweat from the too violent exertion
he gives himself. Violent exertion abruptly given is very apt to be
followed by a relapse after the weakening effects of illness and the
consequent inactivity.

Plenty of walking exercise during convalescence from affections of
the breathing organs is the only course likely to ward off defective
wind, which so frequently occurs as a sequel to these affections.
One often hears it advised to turn a horse out for a few weeks after
attacks such as referred to. This means a run at grass in the summer,
and in the winter turning in to a box stall. In either case too
much bulky food is apt to be consumed to be favorable to good wind,
and systematic exercise is not given. Of the two courses, turning
out to grass is the better, as the food is of a laxative character,
and the animal takes some exercise. But the best of all is to keep
the horse up so that the amount and character of the food can be
regulated and a definite amount of exercise given. Walking exercise
during convalescence from acute affections of the breathing organs
brings these organs gently into play, rouses mildly their functional
activity, and is the only safe way to tone them up, and prepare them
by degrees for more violent exertion, which they can then perform
without showing any unsoundness of wind.

Swelling of the legs occurring from any cause--for instance, as
a sequel to pink-eye--can be got rid of much more promptly by
judicious exercise than by allowing the horse to stand; and much time
can thus be saved. Keeping in a box stall facilitates and hastens the
process, but half an hour’s walking exercise should be given twice a
day. When the horse is not being walked, his legs should be properly
bandaged with cotton batting and in the majority of instances the
swelling will be practically gone in a few days.

For sale horses and for show horses, walking exercise is a most
important factor in enabling those in charge of them to attain their
objects. A sale horse must be fleshy to attract most purchasers.
Dealers all over the world recognize this fact, as well as the one
that good, fresh-looking legs contribute in a marked degree to a
horse’s saleableness.

Walking exercise does not to any appreciable extent take the flesh
off a horse, nor does it make the legs stale. Flesh put on under
walking exercise is harder and gives a more finished appearance to a
horse. This form of exercise also stimulates the circulation of the
legs, keeps them clean and renders them hard, so that when a horse so
treated is put to more violent work the tissues of the legs can stand
it without showing wear and tear.

In the case of show horses, plenty of walking exercise is of even
more importance than in sale horses. Show horses must be fit to do
themselves and their handlers credit. In many of the rings the going
is heavy and horses that are likely to be in the ribbons should
be in shape to stand a severe test. If they are not fit when they
are called upon to make a final effort, they will not be equal to
doing their best. Many a ribbon is lost through a horse becoming
fatigued and losing his action and brilliancy in consequence. This
is particularly the case in heavy harness horse classes. Walking
exercise will do for a good deal more than half of it. After a show
horse is well broken, three times a week is plenty to hitch him, and
the day he is hitched he should also be walked once, and all other
days twice. This plan will get him fit, allow him to keep in flesh,
keep his mouth fresh, and his legs from getting stale, all of which
are important points to consider in a show horse. Exercise twice
a day contributes in a large measure to good manners. This is not
an important point in some well broken horses of easy disposition,
but in others that are apt to “get above themselves” if not well
exercised, it is an important one. Nothing helps to improve a
half-broken horse more than to go out twice a day.




        THE HORSE’S COAT IN SPRING, SUMMER, AUTUMN AND WINTER


The state of a horse’s coat indicates, in a considerable measure,
the general condition of the individual. If the coat gets into bad
condition in a horse that is worked, it will soon injuriously affect
his general health, which will show itself by loss of flesh, life
and vigor. The care of the coat then, outside of the question of
appearance, has an important influence in contributing to a horse’s
well-being.

If we had summer-like weather all the year round, with its genial
warmth to encourage the activity of the skin, we should have very
little trouble with the coat, as it would then remain short and
sleek, with very little care. With the changes of season, however,
and great variations of temperature, we find marked alterations
in it. The horse’s skin, and its appendage, the coat, are very
sensitive to climatic conditions, and nature makes an effort to
change the coat to suit altered states. Nature is very successful
in this while a horse is roaming about under natural conditions,
and a horse so circumstanced can stand great extremes of temperature
without suffering; but as soon as he is put to work and exerted to a
sufficient extent to heat him up, he then requires artificial care,
in order to maintain good condition.

As has been already stated, the coat is more easily kept in a
satisfactory state during the summer than at any other season of the
year. The heat of summer encourages sweating, and this is beneficial
rather than injurious, within certain limits, so long as the horse
“cools out” and dries up in a normal manner. This is more readily
accomplished in the summer than at any other time, owing to the
shortness of the coat, and the little danger from drafts at this
season of the year. Nothing is more injurious to a horse in this
connection than allowing his coat to remain wet. At certain times
of the year, when it is long, some horses will remain wet for hours
after having been exerted, unless they receive great attention. The
frequent occurrence of this will soon cause unthriftiness. Standing
with a wet coat in this way frequently has a most relaxing effect
upon the system, and must be guarded against. In summer time there is
very little difficulty about this, but there is one form of treatment
very much neglected in hot weather, which is of great benefit if
properly applied. The coats of horses that are frequently warmed
up in hot weather get sticky, greasy and stained, and it is almost
impossible to get them perfectly clean and glossy without giving
them a good washing at intervals. Some horsemen are afraid to adopt
this treatment, but it is not at all dangerous, and most beneficial
if properly carried out. As a rule it is only necessary on very hot
days, and if it is done on cool ones, care must be taken to “dry out”
carefully to avoid chills. When a horse comes in on a hot day, having
sweated more or less profusely, water that has been warmed in the sun
should be freely sponged over him. This should then be thoroughly
scraped off, and a woolen cooler put over him; then he should be
walked for a while, if possible, until he cools out. As soon as the
coat is dry, grooming will make him look and feel fresh and well. It
is not always necessary to use a cooler in “cooling out” when it is
very warm.

The autumn is the most trying time of the year to keep the coat in a
satisfactory state, for several reasons. A partial moult takes place
at this time, rendering the skin irritable to some extent. Besides,
there are the extremes of cool nights and warm days. The cool nights
cause the coat to grow and increase the tendency to sweating when
the animal is exerted during the heat of the day. From the increased
length of coat it becomes much more difficult to dry a horse after
work, and he is apt to suffer unless great care is taken to protect
him from the ill-consequences of standing with a wet coat. This
difficulty becomes so marked in some horses at the end of September
and throughout October that those in charge of them begin to discuss
the advisability of clipping.

As a general rule, clipping should be deferred as late into the
autumn as possible, or until the temperature of the day and night
are not so much at variance; then the growth of the coat lessens
considerably. A horse clipped on the 10th of November may not require
clipping again for two months or more, while one clipped on the 10th
of October may need it again in two or three weeks. Horses clipped
early in the autumn usually have very dry-looking coats, and it
seldom improves their appearance, though it does in a measure relieve
them from the ill-results of standing with wet coats, especially if
it is repeated several times during that season.

Every reasonable effort should be made to put off clipping until
November, and the necessity for it may be avoided in nearly all
cases until then. This can be accomplished in most instances by care
in proper blanketing. A light sheet may be all that the horse can
stand in the day time without sweating, but at night he should be
kept fairly warmly blanketed to check the growth of the coat. It
is usually necessary to begin this the end of August. Discretion,
of course, must be used, so that the covering is not heavy enough
to cause sweating. Some horses have naturally fine short coats, and
with ordinary care will not need clipping, even in winter, which is
so much the better; but the majority of them need it, and are much
benefited by it.

Under certain circumstances, as in the case of horses having been
turned out and brought up for work, say in April, it will be
beneficial to clip them, for otherwise they look badly and will not
thrive well on account of sweating too freely when worked.

Clipping at this season of the year retards the shedding of the
roots of the coat, and it is better to let it shed naturally in case
the conditions are such as will admit of it, without injury to the
horse’s condition and working ability.

In a horse that is not too ambitious and has not to be exerted
violently, it is better to wait for him to shed naturally, which he
will do rapidly at this season of the year if he gets regular work,
good grooming and is well fed. Horses that are fed warmed boiled
feed for the evening meal will shed much earlier in the season than
those kept on dry feed. Some horses, however, will not stand this
without becoming too relaxed in the bowels, especially if worked
hard more than once or twice a week; others will not stand it at all
without scouring. Care in all instances must be exercised not to
feed an excessive quantity. In clipping saddle horses the mistake is
usually made of including the part covered by the saddle, and a great
deal of trouble frequently results in consequence. Newly clipped
horses, particularly if they are not thoroughly used to the pressure
and friction of the saddle, are very apt to develop an eczematous
eruption under it, and even horses regularly used for saddle work are
not immune to such injury after clipping.

The layman is apt to assume that an attack of eczema coming on under
the conditions described is due to derangement of the blood or the
digestive organs. While derangement of the blood or the digestive
organs may predispose to an attack of this nature, some local
irritation is usually needed to determine its development. It is
obvious that a considerable amount of local irritation must result
when the skin, divested of its coat, is, for an hour or two daily,
subjected to the pressure and rubbing of the saddle. The rubbing
action is further intensified by the sweating that almost always
takes place under the saddle. Another contributing cause is the rapid
drying and cooling of the skin when the saddle is removed from a
clipped horse’s back. The rapid drying and cooling is apt to have a
deranging effect upon the circulation of the skin at this part, and
consequently conduces to inflammation of that covering.

Eczema under the saddle is more apt to occur in cold than in warm
weather. More than fifteen per cent. of the saddle horses clipped in
midwinter develop this affection under the saddle, while not more
than one per cent. with backs unclipped show it.

When harness horses develop it, it is on the parts subjected to most
pressure that it first shows itself, as under the collar and back
pad. The eruption has a great tendency to spread, and beginning on
the skin covered by the saddle, often extends over the whole of the
back and side.

Occurring, as it frequently does, with a number of clipped horses
in a large stable, it is thought by stablemen and owners to be
contagious, but it is not so. It is apparent, then, that clipping the
coat under the saddle is a bad practice. Even in cases in which an
eruption does not take place, the rubbing is apt to cause temporary
baldness and troublesome abrasions, particularly if the skin has not
been toughened by long and continual pressure and rubbing of the
saddle, the result of steady saddlework.




                THE CAUSES OF DIGESTIVE DISORDERS--I


The breeder and horse owner have not the time or opportunity to
acquire expert knowledge of the diseases of the horse, but it will
well repay them to give a little thought and study to the causes of
preventive disorders, particularly to those of the digestive organs.
The exercise of a little thought and judgment in the management
of a stable of horses will lessen to almost nil the occurrence of
digestive ailments among its inmates. There are certain affections to
which horseflesh is heir which it is impossible to prevent under some
circumstances, but those of the digestive organs can be very largely
prevented.

We must study these causes under a number of heads. First of all
there is the condition of the individual at time of feeding, the
quantity of the food, the character of the food, and the form in
which it is given. Under the foregoing heads I have not included the
natural predisposition of some animals to digestive troubles, for
the inherent tendency to some affections cannot be classed among
the preventable causes, but, nevertheless, a little extra care may
neutralize the tendency to them. Take, for instance, a horse of a
nervous temperament, with a light middle-piece. Such an individual is
very liable to scour when first taken out, and in some horses this
cannot be prevented; but careful attention in giving non-laxative
and easily digestible food in properly regulated quantities, with
care about watering and the avoidance of violent and overtaxing work,
especially when first taken out, will often control this tendency. If
nervous, light-middled horses can once be made fat by proper dieting,
and are kept in health by light, slow work, the inclination to scour
will be much lessened. The accumulation of fat in the abdomen has a
tendency to lessen the violence of the action of the bowels and thus
to counteract scouring. Horses of the temperament just referred to
are better fed on corn than oats, as corn is more fattening and less
stimulating to the nervous system, so that horses fed on it are less
inclined to be excitable. Greedy, voracious feeders are predisposed
to digestive ailments from their tendency to overtax the digestive
organs by the consumption of too large quantities of food too hastily
eaten. The means of prevention of such a cause is apparent and easy
of application. These are examples of two inherent predisposing
causes.

A feed that an animal can take with impunity and possibly with
benefit under some circumstances, may prove an exciting cause of
that very serious trouble in horses, acute indigestion, under other
conditions. Take, for instance, a horse that is to be called on to
do an unusually long and hard day’s work. The anxious, over-zealous
and well-meaning driver will, in some instances, give an extra-sized
morning meal, with the idea of buoying the horse up for the ordeal of
the day. As soon as the horse has had time to consume it, he starts
on his journey; it may be to pull a heavy load, or for faster work.
The more violent the work, the more will the digestive process be
interfered with. As soon as the course of digestion is arrested,
fermentation begins and it may go on to such a degree that the horse
soon begins to show signs of something being amiss. He most likely
came out of the stable showing life and energy, and went at his work
with spirit, but after going a few miles, however, he begins to
sweat more than he should, to lag, to drop his head and to bloat.
As soon as he is allowed to stand he shows restlessness and becomes
demonstrative in his exhibition of pain. He has acute indigestion,
due to mistaken kindness on the part of his attendant. Instead of
having been given a full feed or rather more than usual, he should
have had less, and the first opportunity taken of giving him another
small feed.

We have the same thing occurring under different conditions, as, for
example, when a horse has had an unusually hard day’s work and is
very tired. He is put in the stable and given his usual meal, which
he eats. After an hour or so he begins to show signs of abdominal
pain. His attendant cannot understand the reason for this, as the
horse has only had his usual feed. He does not realize that the
horse’s vital powers have become very much lowered, the result of
unusual fatigue, and that the stomach participates in this temporary
inability and becomes, for a time, unequal to exerting its full
digestive powers, and that indigestion has resulted in consequence.
Had the horse been allowed to rest for a time, given a little water
and allowed to nibble hay, he might have been fed with impunity,
although it is usually a wise plan to lessen the feed if a horse is
unusually fatigued. The condition, then, of the individual has to be
considered in determining the amount of food he should get. Horses
that are in good condition, having regular hard work and full feed,
are much less liable to be affected by unusual fatigue and full feed
than those that are irregularly worked.

In addition to the necessity for caution in feeding when a horse is
fatigued from hard work, long abstinence also necessitates care.
A horse that has had his stomach empty for a long time, whether
fatigued or not, is usually ravenous for his food, and is apt to
consume a full allowance of concentrated food too hurriedly to
permit digestion to go on satisfactorily. The old plan of giving a
little thin warm gruel to a fatigued fasting horse is a good one, in
order to prepare him for his full meal later on. It is not always
convenient to furnish this, however, and the next best plan is to
give a couple of quarts of water and a little hay, to get the stomach
into working order before the full meal of concentrated food is
given, preceded by more water.

The quantity of food to be allowed a horse is not only an
important matter of study from the standpoint of economy, but is
a very material one to consider in connection with the question
of preventing digestive disorders. The statement can hardly be
gainsaid that decidedly the most prolific source of ailments of the
digestive tract is overfeeding. Farmers who raise their own feed are
possibly the worst offenders in this respect, and particularly in
the overfeeding of bulky food, or what is called by some roughage.
An enormous amount of hay is thus wasted throughout the country,
and injury done to many horses. It is really not an exaggeration to
state that fully half the amount of hay fed to horses in the rural
districts of this country is wasted. Not only is this so, but a
positive injury is inflicted on the horses that consume it. It is,
of course, true that horses, for the purposes of perfect digestion,
require a certain amount of bulky food. Sufficient nutritious matter
can be supplied in concentrated form, but digestion would not go
on properly without a certain amount of bulk. Volume of feed is
essential to insure the proper activity of the digestive tract.

There is a limit, however, to the bulk required, and if this limit
is much exceeded, there is not only a waste of food, but injury is
done. If a horse is constantly being fed too large a volume of feed,
it overworks and overtaxes the digestive organs, soon weakening these
organs and consequently rendering them more liable to indigestion,
colic, stoppage and diarrhœa. Even if no such evidence of acute
disorder shows itself, as the affections named, the unnecessarily
distended bowels encroach upon the chest capacity and interfere with
the action of the lungs; so that the horse cannot stand as much
exertion as he might otherwise. One likes to see a horse with a good
depth of rib, and well ribbed-up and not presenting a tucked-up
condition, all of which is evidence of a good feeder. But no horse,
unless it is a mare in foal, or one running at grass, should show
what is called a “pot-belly,” as that is a sign that too much bulky
food is being consumed. Too much bulky food is also a cause of that
very serious trouble, called heaves, especially if the food happens
to be of defective quality, and consequently difficult of digestion.
One often hears it said that clover hay is apt to cause heaves. The
reason is that horses are very fond of it, and if they are allowed
all they want, will eat an excessive quantity of it. If the quality
of clover hay is good, and only a proper ration of it is fed, it is
no more likely to cause heaves than any other kind of hay.

Fully one-half the horses one sees in country districts are
pot-bellied, especially in the winter. In many farm stables you
see racks kept full of hay constantly in front of the horses,
and the less work they do the more hay they eat, most of them
eating certainly twice as much as is good for them. In cities it
is different. Hay being high-priced, the quantity fed is usually
limited, with the result that digestive troubles are very much
rarer than in country districts. It is directly the opposite with
regard to the diseases of the breathing organs. In the large,
crowded stables of the cities, with breathing space limited, the air
becomes charged with impurities, with the result that diseases of
the breathing organs are very prevalent, while in the country they
are comparatively rare. The relative prevalence of digestive and
respiratory troubles in city and country affords a good illustration
of cause and effect, but the country horse owner has the advantage,
as he has to encounter chiefly diseases that are largely preventable.
It is a difficult matter to successfully cope with the prevention of
respiratory ailments in cities.

It has been already stated and emphasized that the feeding of too
much bulky food to horses is one of the most prolific causes of
digestive disorders. The question naturally follows: How much is
sufficient for a horse to attain the best results? As far as the
supply of nourishment is concerned, it can be supplied amply in
concentrated form, as in oats or corn; but a certain amount of bulk
is necessary. If there is not a certain amount of bulk in the food
material in the bowels, the coats of these organs have not sufficient
contents to contract on, so that these organs may be able to move
along in proper time substances that should be excreted. The bowels
become torpid, as far as excretion is concerned, and the proper
digestion and absorption of nutritive material is not carried on.
Under these circumstances, health and condition cannot be long
maintained, and there will be a waste of food fed in concentrated
form. Of course, the amount of bulky food necessary varies according
to the size of the horse, and it is approximately correct to put it
at about one pound per hundred-weight of the animal’s weight. This
may be exceeded in some cases with impunity, to the extent of a few
pounds, particularly in horses used for slow work; but it will be
found sufficient in the majority of cases. While horses are being
used for very fast work, or are in training, a less quantity will
suffice. The usual plan in large cities is to feed the allowance of
hay all at one time, in the evening, after the horse has finished his
day’s work, and it works very well. People used to seeing a horse get
all the hay he can eat, think, when they see him restricted, that he
is being starved, but they will find he thrives if adequately fed
with grain, has better wind, more endurance, particularly for fast
work, and is much less liable to digestive ills.




                THE CAUSES OF DIGESTIVE DISORDERS--II


Experience proves that there is no better concentrated food for a
horse for good hard work than oats. This can be readily explained.
First of all, it contains the essential flesh-forming, fat and
heat-producing elements in approximately their proper ratio. It also
supplies to the nervous system, as no other grain appears to do to
the same degree, the sustenance that gives life and ambition. In
addition to this, oats have a physical property that mechanically
fits them for ready digestion in a greater degree than any other
grain. This is due to the fact that the particles of the meal are
more loosely put together than in any other grain and that the hull
is coarser. On this account, when a masticated mass of oats enters
the stomach, owing to its looseness it is readily permeated by the
digestive fluid, so that digestion goes on readily and thoroughly.
Possibly the most indigestible of all grains, when fed by itself,
either ground or whole, is wheat, and this is due to its physical
character. A mass of wheat forms a tough, glue-like lump in the
stomach, so that it is comparatively impervious to the action of the
digestive fluid, and digestion goes on slowly and imperfectly, and
is apt to be arrested, causing serious indigestion. Peas and beans,
owing to their flinty nature, are also less digestible than oats.
Corn, when fed whole, is fairly easily digested, but when ground is
difficult of digestion, unless the cobs are also ground with it,
which renders it more pervious. Wheat, corn, pea and bean meal can
be rendered much more digestible by being fed thoroughly mixed with
a little chaffed hay. The chaffed hay, when consumed with the meal,
renders the meal more pervious to the action of the digestive fluid
and consequently more digestible. Where, from economy or convenience,
it is found desirable to use any of these grains for horses, it can
be done with comparative safety, if they are ground and fed with
chaffed hay. When meal is fed with chaff in this way, it is generally
quite thoroughly moistened, which is a mistake, as in this condition
it is apt to be too hastily eaten and too imperfectly mixed with
saliva to be thoroughly digested. One reason given for moistening
is that it makes the meal stick to the chaff and insures the two
being consumed together. There is something in this, but, as a rule,
if they are thoroughly mixed, there will be enough of the chaff
consumed to insure the digestibility of the meal. If moistening
is done at all, it should be done only slightly. A horse is so
constituted that the major portion of his feed should be fed to him
dry, as in this condition he will digest it more thoroughly and with
less liability to digestive troubles.

Of course, a certain amount of laxative food is necessary in order
to mildly stimulate the bowels and keep them sufficiently active.
Some horses cannot stand laxative food without their bowels becoming
unduly relaxed. To such it is better not to give any, particularly
if they are going to work the next day. It is an interesting point
to study, and one that throws some light on the peculiarities of the
digestive tract, to explain why bran mash, boiled feed and roots
act as laxatives. They do not possess any purgative principle, as
aloes does. If a dose of aloes is given to a horse, it is dissolved
in the stomach, taken up by the blood vessels, going the round of
the circulation, and is eventually eliminated by the glands of the
bowels, increasing their secretion very much and rousing the action
of the coats of the bowels, so that a large quantity of liquid
excrement is passed. An explanation sometimes given of the laxative
action of mash and the like, is that it is due to the increased
amount of liquid supplied by the moist food; but that is not a
satisfactory explanation, as there is not enough of it to make any
difference. The most reasonable explanation appears to be that it
acts as a laxative by virtue of its indigestibility. It apparently
acts in the way that oil does. Small quantities, as a couple of
ounces, of linseed oil, given three times a day to a horse, are
digested and cause the animal to accumulate fat; but if a pint or a
pint and a half is given, it will not be digested, but passes on into
the bowels and stimulates them, causing laxative action. It will be
noticed that it is the undigested portion of the oil that causes the
purging. So it is with boiled feed and mash. It is on account of a
considerable quantity not being digested, that passes into the bowels
and stimulates their action. This is beneficial up to a certain
point, but if the bowels are overstimulated, irritation is apt to
result and the system is robbed of some nutrition. Horses that are
not worked or worked very little, can stand, and, in fact, require
more laxative food than those more exerted. Active exertion of itself
has a naturally stimulating effect upon the bowels.

The lesson we learn from all this, is that moist food for horses
should be given with care and judgment. Given too frequently or in
too large quantities at a time, it is apt to cause indigestion and
undue relaxation of the bowels. Most horses that are doing little
work, such as those in moderate exercise, are benefited by a little
boiled oats and barley, given every evening. This is a very good
plan, particularly for sale horses. It is a good rule to follow with
hard-worked horses, that if they happen to stand in for a day, a mash
should be substituted for their evening meal of grain. With horses
that work hard and regularly six days in the week, the general custom
of giving the mash on Saturday evening is a good one; but in the case
of horses that may be left in for the day at irregular intervals, it
is usually the best plan to give simply a mash for the evening meal
instead of grain.

Veterinarians meet with a frequently fatal disease called by them
azoturia, which in almost all cases is a preventable disease, due
to an error in feeding. It usually occurs in horses used to regular
work and good feed being kept idle for a few days and getting as much
feed as when they are working. It has been found in large stables
that with the carrying out of the rule that if a horse does not go
out during the day he shall have no grain in the evening, but only a
mash, there will be very few, if any, of these cases.

Indiscretion in watering horses sometimes leads to derangement of the
digestive organs. The chief trouble arises from allowing too long
intervals to elapse in watering. Under normal conditions water may be
given as often as it will be taken, and it is rare that a horse will
take too much, unless he is very warm. Even when he is quite warm, a
quart or two may be given with impunity. The proper plan is to water
before feeding, as the water is then rapidly absorbed and does not
interfere with digestion. Unfortunately, it is difficult to get many
horses to drink, particularly in cool weather, before feeding, and
they have to be watered afterwards; it is, however, wise to allow
an hour to elapse before doing so. If a horse takes a full feed of
grain and a drink shortly afterwards and is then put to any violent
exertion, he is very apt to suffer from digestive derangement. If
a horse is suffering from diarrhœa, or is purging from a dose of
physic, water must be restricted and slightly chilled; otherwise,
superpurgation and death may result.

An irrational plan of salting horses sometimes causes trouble. That
horses require salt is generally recognized, but a great many follow
the plan of giving it at intervals of a week or more, when they
become very ravenous for it and eat a great deal of it, which makes
them so thirsty that they will drink immoderately, and this will
sometimes cause digestive derangement. Horses should have access to
salt constantly; they then get the most benefit from it.

Before leaving the subject of feeding, it should have been stated
that care should be taken in making changes of diet, which should
not be done too abruptly, particularly changes to food which, if
eaten hurriedly or in considerable quantities, is apt to cause
indigestion. Good examples of such food are roots, boiled grain and
grass. An attack of indigestion in a horse that is a good feeder may
almost certainly be caused by giving too large a feed of roots or
boiled grain or by turning him into a fresh clover field that has
a luxurious growth of herbage. If the grass is short, and he has
to work hard for his feed, he can be safely turned into a pasture
field; but where there is luxuriant growth, there should be several
days’ restricted feeding before it is safe to allow some horses,
particularly greedy feeders, liberty to eat at will.

In all horses in which the excrement from the bowels shows evidence
of imperfect mastication, the cause should be sought for, and removed
if possible. Greedy feeders bolt their grain, not taking time for
perfect mastication. This not only results in waste, but is apt
to cause irritation also. Bolting the grain may be prevented in a
variety of ways. Numbers of feed boxes have been invented to overcome
this trouble, some of which are fairly effectual. The old-fashioned
plan of putting a number of stones amongst the grain works very well.
The addition of an equal quantity of bran to the grain is also an
assistance, but really the most effectual plan, where practicable, is
to mix two or three pounds of chaffed hay with the grain. In the case
of horses which do not bolt their grain, where there is evidence of
imperfect mastication, the grinders should be thoroughly examined.
This should be done by a qualified and reputable veterinarian. The
wandering, self-styled horse dentist should be carefully avoided,
as he is apt to injure the teeth by the over-use of the forceps and
tooth-rasp. Many horses’ lives are shortened by allowing unprincipled
and ignorant men to ill-treat the teeth.

Horses are more liable than almost any other species, to irregular
growths of the grinders, owing to their peculiar anatomical
arrangement. The two rows of grinders in the upper jaw are further
apart than those in the lower, and consequently overlap them on
either side. The grinding surface is beveled, and in the upper jaw
slants from within outwards, forming a ridge on the outside of each
row. The arrangement in the lower jaw is just the opposite, the
ridge coming on the inside. In order that grinding of the food may
take place in a perfect manner, the teeth must come into perfect
apposition. If the grinders do not come into perfect contact in the
process of grinding, the food is not only imperfectly masticated,
but the teeth wear irregularly. Nature’s method of keeping the
teeth of normal dimensions is by the wear they experience during
grinding. If from any cause this wear does not take place throughout
all the grinding surface, irregular projections form, and are most
apt to be found on the outer ridge of the upper rows of grinders
and on the inner of the lower ones. These projections are liable to
interfere with mastication to a degree proportionate to their size,
and sometimes cut and abrade the cheeks and tongue. When the mouth is
in such a condition, it will be much benefited by proper attention.
The owner, however, should not be misled by traveling dentists into
thinking that all horses’ teeth require attention. The dentist points
out the projecting ridges on the outside of the upper rows and on the
inside of the lower ones, and makes the owner believe this to be an
abnormal condition. Some owners seem to think, or are made to think,
that the grinding surfaces should be level from side to side, instead
of beveled, as nature made them.

In addition to the tendency to injurious projections on the grinders,
as already described, we not infrequently find on the front part
of the first upper grinders and on the back part of the last lower
ones, prominences of considerable size. These are found generally in
horses with “parrot mouths,” or what are sometimes called “overshot
mouths.” This is a deformity, as the upper jaw is placed a little
too far forward with respect to the lower one, so that a portion
of the first upper grinders and of the last lower ones do not
come in contact with opposing teeth. These are not kept of normal
dimensions by wear; consequently, projections are formed, which
seriously interfere with mastication, and otherwise injure the mouth.
Occasionally a broken or decayed tooth is found, which also gravely
interferes with the grinding of the food. If from any cause the power
of mastication is impaired, it results not only in waste, but the
imperfectly prepared food is liable to cause digestive derangement.
If a horse is found to slobber at the mouth and to have difficulty in
eating, the teeth should always be carefully examined by an expert.




                  THE USE OF BURRS ON HORSES’ BITS


Every now and then one hears of the A. S. P. C. A. making a crusade
against the use of burrs on horses’ bits, and it is one of the
practices that their agents are always on the alert to detect. They
assume that the use of a burr is such a very evident act of cruelty,
that they would have no difficulty in securing a conviction, which
would redound to their credit as assiduous and vigilant officials.

Owners of horses appear to be afraid to take a chance of defending
such a suit. Why? Is it because they are averse to spending the time,
experiencing the incidental worry, and standing the expense, or is it
the fear of being convicted of cruelty to an animal? It seems to the
writer that the latter is the chief reason, and from which one would
naturally shrink; otherwise it appears difficult to understand why
horsemen allow men who, as a rule, have very limited or no knowledge
of horse management, to dictate to them as to what equipment they
should use in driving their horses.

To one who knows the use of a burr, it seems incredible to think
that, with a fair trial and a proper presentation of a defense, a
conviction could be obtained against a driver of a horse for using a
burr on a properly selected subject.

Numberless experts could be obtained as witnesses to show that the
use of a burr is no cruelty in properly selected cases, and such
experts could be obtained amongst horsemen of undoubted standing who
would shrink from anything that savored of cruelty to animals.

Still further, it could be demonstrated, as it has been to the
writer many times, that it is positively inhumane not to use a burr
on some horses. One comes in contact with nervous, fretful pullers,
that wear themselves out, lose their appetites, and become wrecks,
that by the use of a burr often cease pulling, in a large measure,
drive comfortably, and regain condition. People are heard to speak
of burrs as if they are instruments of torture, placed on a horse’s
bit to irritate him. Some suppose that they are used to give a
horse a stylish carriage and promote action. As there is so much
misconception with regard to the object of their use, it will be well
to explain what is intended to be accomplished by them.

A burr is made of a piece of thick leather, studded with bristles
on one side, about half an inch long. It has a hole in the centre,
so that it can be fitted on the mouth-piece of the bit, and a slit
running from the circumference to this hole, so that it can be taken
off or put on, as occasion requires.

When it is put on it is placed on one end of the mouth-piece of
the bit, right up against the cheek-piece of it, with the bristled
surface towards the horse’s mouth. If the mouth-piece of the bit is
of proper width, the bristles do not prick the skin of the horse’s
lips, unless he voluntarily presses on them. After he has pressed on
them a few times, finding they are uncomfortable, he usually stops
doing it; then they don’t hurt him.

This is the object of a burr, namely, to keep a horse from pressing
on one side of the bit. A horse that presses forcibly on one side of
the bit, which habit is usually called side-lining, is very difficult
to guide, as he takes an unyielding grip of the bit, usually holds
his head to one side, and pulls to an extent most uncomfortable to
his driver, and most wearing to himself. Anxious, ambitious, free,
high-strung horses are apt to get into this habit, unless their
mouths are properly educated to the bit, and their general handling
and management good.

Not the least important amongst the exciting causes is insufficient
and irregular work, causing a horse to get what is often called
“above himself.” Under such circumstances, if he is a free horse,
he will go up firmly against the bit, and may bruise or injure
his mouth in some way, producing soreness and irritability of the
gums where the bit presses. This causes him to pull more, and some
horses brace themselves against the cheek-piece of the bit, which
enables them to pull to an extent most trying to the driver, and
most wearing to themselves. The farther they go the more they pull
and the more excited, fretful and heated they become. The constant
repetition of this causes them to get “run down” in condition, and
the unnecessarily violent exertion they make in performing their work
is very hard on their legs and feet.

If by the simple expedient of using a burr on a puller’s bit, this
habit of pulling can be lessened, and practically overcome in some
cases, is it not justifiable to take the risk of subjecting a
horse’s lips to a few pricks with bristles in order to attain such
desirable results? A fretful puller suffers infinitely more, by the
over-exertion to which he subjects himself, and by working himself up
into an excited and heated state, than by the use of burrs.

As for the driver, it becomes absolutely painful to him to drive a
side-lining puller, and it is not without danger, especially where
there is crowded traffic, as in cities, on account of the difficulty
of guiding and controlling a horse with such a disagreeable fault. To
a driver who has had his arms pulled out, the use of a burr does not
seem by any means too drastic a remedy.

It may be asked: Is there not some other means of a less heroic
nature, that may be resorted to, to overcome this disagreeable
habit? There is no doubt that thoughtless, careless, ignorant and
unintelligent handling and management of horses, especially of young
ones, makes many pullers. Sensitive, nervous, courageous horses are
predisposed to this fault, and there are some in which it is almost
impossible to prevent the development of it.

Some horses, whose mouths have become irritable from pulling, will be
very much benefited by “turning out” for two or three months. Keeping
the bit out of the mouth for a length of time allows that organ to
heal and freshen up, until it may regain something like its normal
condition; but much care must be exercised when they are again put
to work, otherwise they will soon relapse into their former habit of
pulling. No matter how much care is exercised with some horses, that
may almost be called natural pullers, they will develop the fault,
and any measures adopted to overcome it are fruitless, and all that
can be done is to seek measures of control, such as proper bitting
and the use of burrs. Many pullers are quite valuable horses, and
their owners are loth to lose their service, or even to part with
them for a good price, on account of the good qualities they possess.

The use of burrs, like everything else in the management and control
of horses, should be done with discretion. Bits and bearing reins can
be made instruments of torture, just as much and more than burrs, if
not intelligently used. The apparently simple matter of placing the
bit in the proper position in a horse’s mouth is one subject to great
abuse, and is the cause of much suffering. It is no exaggeration to
state that fully one-third of the horses one sees on the streets
in New York City have not got their bits in the proper position in
their mouths. How frequently one sees horses with their mouths partly
open, tongues dry and projecting more or less from their mouths, due
entirely to bits being placed too high in them. Much of the pulling
is due to this error in bitting, as is also the unsightly fault of
tongue-lolling.

No practical person advocates not using bits, although on account of
the ignorance and lack of intelligence and skill in the manner in
which they are used, they are the cause of more suffering than all
other causes combined.

There are some pullers that burrs do not benefit much, and they are
sometimes used on horses unnecessarily. They are occasionally used
on horses that do not pull, but have acquired the habit of pulling
out in double harness. A much more rational and effectual way of
overcoming this fault is to drive the horse on the other side.




Transcriber’s Note:

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Misplaced hyphens were removed; one final stop missing at the
end of a sentence was added. “It it” change to “It is.”





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS ON HORSE SUBJECTS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


