The Project Gutenberg eBook of Brazil, the land of rubber
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Brazil, the land of rubber
        At the third international rubber and allied trades exhibition, New York, 1912

Author: 1912 Exposição internacioncal de borracha de New York Brazil. Commissão
        Associação Comercial do Amazonas

Other: 1912 New York International rubber and allied trades exhibition. 3d

Release date: February 26, 2025 [eBook #75473]

Language: English, Portuguese

Original publication: New York: Brazilian Government, 1912

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRAZIL, THE LAND OF RUBBER ***





Brazil, the land of rubber




                              [Illustration]

                                  BRAZIL
                                   THE
                             LAND _of_ RUBBER

                                  AT THE
                      THIRD INTERNATIONAL RUBBER AND
                         ALLIED TRADES EXHIBITION
                                 NEW YORK
                                   1912

                         WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF
                         THE BRAZILIAN GOVERNMENT




BRAZIL COURT


Brazil occupies no less than ten thousand square feet of space on the
Balcony Floor. The Exhibit is specially comprehensive. There is a fine
archway to each entrance to the court dominated by the arms of the
Federal Government. An Information Bureau is provided, at which all
enquiries as to Brazilian rubber will be answered. The walls are hung
with statistics and maps of the country. Close by are the offices of
the Brazilian Commissioners and a refreshment kiosk, where the Federal
Government dispenses Brazilian coffee to visitors. One of the first
things to strike the eye is the huge recumbent figure of the Rubber
Colossus, overlooking the mighty Amazon and its innumerable tributaries,
all of them highways of the rubber collecting industry. From this point
the visitor may, with the assistance of a number of pictures, 22 feet
by 12 feet, take a bird’s eye view tour up the Amazon. Alongside these
pictures is a unique collection from the different States of Brazil of
rubber and other products, the preponderance of the rubber industry being
illustrated by a fine pyramid of caoutchouc. Dotted here and there are
life-sized models of Brazilian workmen in their native costumes. Arriving
at the entrance to the Amazonas Section we find Dr. Pinto actually
engaged in the coagulation of latex by his new smokeless process, which
manufacturers have admitted turns out excellent rubber and which has the
great advantage over the native system hitherto in vogue, of saving an
enormous amount of both time and labor, whilst giving splendid results.
A second series of pictures affords a vivid idea of the salient features
of the State of Amazonas. In this section we have a mountain of rubber,
and a ball which weighs 1,600 pounds. There is a fine picture of a
native tapping a rubber tree and numerous very beautiful photographs.
That nothing may be wanting to the completeness of the representation of
Brazil’s great rubber industry a series of Moving Pictures is shown in
the Main Hall of the Exhibition, which visitors will find particularly
instructive after they have gone through the Brazilian Section on the
Balcony Floor.

[Illustration: MARECHAL HERMES DA FONSECA, President of Brazil.]




BRAZILIAN DELEGATION _of the_ INTERNATIONAL RUBBER EXHIBITION, NEW YORK

DISTRIBUTION OF SERVICE


FEDERAL GOVERNMENT COMMISSIONERS

    _President_
    DR. CANDIDO MENDES DE ALMEIDA

    _Assistant_
    MAIRO BAPTISTA NUNES
    Official representation, information and publicity

    _Vice-President_
    ADMIRAL JOSÉ CARLOS DE CARVALHO

    _Assistants_
    DR. OSCAR SAYAO DE MORAES
    ADALBERTO DE SOUSA ARANHA
    Disposition of Exhibits, Decoration, Etc.

    _General Secretary_
    DR. EUGENIO DAHNE

    _Assistant Secretary_
    MR. DILLWYME M. HAZLETT

    _Accountant_
    MR. IVO GRACA CAMPOS
    Reception of Exhibits, Correspondence, Purchasing,
    Accounts, Payments, Etc.

STATE COMMISSIONERS

    _State of Amazonas_
    DR. MANOEL LOBATO

    _Commercial Association of Amazonas_
    MR. A. W. STEADMAN, New York Commercial Co.
    MR. J. LEVY, Manáos

    _State of Pará_
    _Commercial Association of Pará_
    MR. GEORGE E. PELL, General Rubber Co., New York

    _State of Bahia_
    J. DO ARGOLLO

    _State of Minas Geraes_
    DR. I. SANTIAGO CARDWELL QUINN

    _Rubber Demonstration_
    DR. CARLOS CERQUEIRA PINTO

    OFFICE HOURS—9 to 12 A. M. and 2 to 5 P. M.
    Committee Meeting of Delegation—Daily 3 to 4 P. M.

[Illustration: DR. PEDRO DE TOLEDO,

Minister of Agriculture of the Government of Brazil]




INTRODUCTION


Brazil, with its vast and immeasurable virgin forests in the valley
of the Amazon, undoubtedly the greatest in the world, traversed by
innumerable tributaries, many of which are larger and deeper than many of
the rivers in other countries, can be considered the largest storehouse
of native rubber of the best quality, all ready to be extracted,
coagulated and applied to all kinds of industries. No other investment of
capital can be as remunerative as that invested in the extraction of the
native rubber from full grown trees, already existing in large quantities
of many millions, and in zones full of natural richness.

For the culture of rubber trees of the various species, the whole
northern and central portions of Brazil are well adapted, and will give
magnificent results in the near future.

Nature has prodigally provided easy means of communication by waterways
broad and deep. The climate is equitable without great variations of
temperature, which gives perpetual summer and produces large and nearly
uninterrupted harvests of agricultural products.

The difficulties which hinder the rapid development of the extraction
of rubber are the obstructions in rivers in certain places, at certain
seasons of the year when the water is low, and the fact that the
production of rubber is so remunerative that all the vigorous men that
are thus engaged do not care to engage in any other industry. Thus it is
that living in the rubber regions is very expensive because everything
must be brought there, even implements and foodstuffs.

These difficulties, however, have been brought to the attention of the
Federal Government of Brazil, and of the States, and in consequence
an important Congress was called and presided over by the Minister of
Agriculture, Industry and Commerce. The Legislative power also passed
special laws providing measures urgently needed to better the existing
conditions. These laws also provide for a department under the Minister
of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce, to be called “The Protection of
Rubber,” which has already been formed and is at work.

Among the various and important provisions of the law, is the
establishment of various experimental stations for advancing the
cultivation of the four different kinds of rubber trees found in Brazil,
the Hevea braziliensis (seringa), castillôa (caucho), maniçoba, and
mangabeira. These trees are all natives of Brazil and can be cultivated
from the upper regions of the Amazon to the States of S. Paulo and
Paraná. That is, from the extreme north to nearly the extreme south, one
or other of these species can be cultivated, according to the climate and
character of the soil in each region.

Various concessions and money premiums are offered to attract capital
and awaken activity in this industry. Certain services, such as the
establishment of hospitals, medical attention and hygienic regulations
are also provided by the Federal Government.

In the pages of this book will be found, fully treated, the principal
points of this important subject. From the statistical tables published
and from the exhibits displayed at the International Rubber Exposition in
New York, it can readily be seen that the rubber of Brazil is judged the
best in the world, and that its production although already enormous is
destined to be largely increased.

                                           DR. CANDIDO MENDES DE ALMEIDA,
                                           President Brazilian Commission.




A MONOGRAPH UPON PARÁ RUBBER




HISTORICAL NOTES ABOUT PARÁ RUBBER


It is in our diaries of the voyage of the Genovese Columbus, that among
the important occurrences of that notable crossing of the ocean, which
gave him immortality, appeared the first references, made by Herrera, to
the quality of a certain gum utilized by the aborigines.

In 1536 Gonçalvo Fernandes d’Oviedo in his “Universal History of
the Indies,” published in Madrid, also mentioned the uses which the
indigenous tribes of North America made of rubber skins in their
amusements.

The Jesuit Charlevoix also refers to it and more fully yet does John
Torquemada who in his “Indian Monarchy,” expresses himself thus: “There
is a tree in this country (Mexico) known to the natives as =ulequahuitl=,
to whom it is of the greatest value. This tree grows in the warm or
torrid zone; and presents itself of a medium height with rounded leaves
of an ashy color. It furnishes in abundance a species of glutinous white
liquid like milk, which makes it of great utility to them.

“The milk of the =ulequahuitl= is obtained by beating the tree with a
small hatchet. The liquid is then seen to ooze out from the incision made
like blood from a wound. The natives gather it into dry hollow gourds of
various sizes. It gradually takes consistency in these receptacles, until
it turns into a gummy mass, from which it is easy to adapt it to any form
which may be required.

“Those who have no gourds, besmear their bodies with the liquid
substance, as it flows out from the tree; which in drying forms itself
into a species of membrane, which is easily taken off and whose thickness
varies according to the coating spread over the skin. Skins very
much appreciated for their elasticity are made with this =ulli=. The
ulli solidified serves for shields, which thus are proof against the
sharpest-pointed arrows, owing without doubt to the pliability of the
material, which does not affect its tenacity.

“Kings and nobles habitually use shoes made of ulli. The Spaniards of
Mexico, moreover, impregnate their capes with =ulli=, so as to make them
water-proof, because it is proved that such substance resists water in a
marvelous manner, but melts before the action of the sun.”

[Illustration: COUNT CANDIDO MENDES DE ALMEIDA,

President of the Federal Government of Brazil Commission.]

In Mexico and Central America, the name of =Ule= still denotes even
to-day one of the rubber trees known as the elastic Castille.

After the Spaniards, the French in 1736 occupied themselves with that
substance, whose interesting properties had not up to that date come to
deserve the attention of the Europeans.

De la Condamine sent by the French Government to Perú, in order to
measure a degree of the terrestrial meridian, was the first to refer
to the Hevea of the Guyana. In a note that accompanied a small sample
of resinous gum of a heavy dark color, almost black, he said to the
Academy of Sciences: “There grows in the forests of the province of the
Esmeraldas a tree known to the natives by the name of Hevé; a white
resinous liquid something like milk runs out from it after making an
incision; this substance is collected in a leaf that is laid close to the
foot of the tree and afterwards is exposed to the sun, when it gets black
at first upon its surface and afterwards by continuous exposure to the
sun becomes black in all its mass. Torches, which burn admirably well,
are made from it. It is known in Quito, that that tree grows also upon
the banks of the Amazon and that the Mainas call it cautchú. They make
earthen moulds in the form of bottles and cover them with that material.
Afterwards when the resin gets hard, they break the mould and thereby
obtain unbreakable water-jars much lighter than glass bottles.”

Later on he wrote: “many are the uses which the Omaguas make of that
resin in the central parts of South America, especially among the Indians
of Pará where the Portuguese gave to the tree that produces it, the name
of =Pauseringa=, because from it ‘seringas,’ much in vogue among the
Omaguas, are manufactured; these being little hollow balloons in the
shape of a pear, into which a tube is inserted.

“In Pará it is moulded in still many different manners, they make
=borracha=, faces of animals, hollow or solid balls and also apply it in
the manufacture of boots which become quite water-proof and when smoked
acquire the appearance of leather.”

Fresneau, a collaborator of de la Condamine, sought to study the
vegetable plants which produced that gum, obtaining as a result that
Aublet, a French botanist, proceeded to interest himself in the question
and completed de la Condamine’s studies, and then classifying the hevé
under the domination of =Hevea Guyanensis=.

It was only in 1798 that the =Ficus elastica=, the first Asiatic plant
producer of rubber became known, and up till 1860 South America, English
India and Java were the only rubber-producing countries in the world.

[Illustration: ADMIRAL JOSÉ CARLOS DE CARVALHO,

Vice-President of the Federal Government of Brazil Commission.]

Much later than this—in 1885, Africa commenced to export this article, an
industry which reached its apogee after the creation by Leopold II of the
Independent State of the Congo.

In the meantime, in spite of the fact of some of the qualities of rubber
and even its applications being known in Europe ever since the Sixteenth
Century, it was only during the Nineteenth Century, that this product
conquered that position as an article very much in evidence which it now
occupies as an indispensable material in modern industry or even still
yet for the necessities which civilization created.

Hérissant and Macquer, in 1768, discovered the first dissolving
processes; in 1770, Priestley vulgarized the property of the “borracha”
in wiping out lead-pencil tracings from which the English name =Rubber=
is derived; Berniard, Fourcroy, Berthollet, Grossart and others occupied
themselves about this commodity, with more or less success. Madier,
in 1820, found out a mechanical means of cutting the rubber-blocks in
order to obtain elastic threads and three years afterwards, MacIntosh
discovered that naphtha dissolved rubber and thus made cloth impervious
to the action of water.

The adaption of rubber to industrial purposes such as the manufacture of
shoes, physical and surgical appliances, elastic cloths, railway-buffers,
machine-springs, etc., was fairly in full swing when the discovery of the
vulcanizing of rubber by Goodyear sprung up, an occurrence which came to
revolutionize the incipient industry and enormously enlarge the scope of
the commercial application of that product, which thence forward came to
assume exceptional importance. The vulcanizing method consists in the
mixing of a certain quantity of rubber with sulphur and in the exposure
of that mixture to an elevated temperature and to a high pressure during
a certain space of time. The rubber transforms itself considerably; the
property of indefinite hardness is lost, but presents greater resistency
to the forces of compression and lengthening-out, supports excessively
low temperature and becomes less sensible to the action of ordinary
dissolving ingredients.

In Brazil already existed up to 1840, a rudimentary industry of shoe
manufacturing and in the water-proofing of various objects. The great
demand for rubber caused by the development of the industry in foreign
countries and consequently the very high profits that the extraction of
rubber in the Brazilian “seringaes” or native rubber-forests presented,
destroyed all that initiative and Brazil passed into the position of
a mere producer of the raw material. In order to appreciate with what
devotion the country lent itself to this occupation, sufficient is it to
contrast the 31 tons exported in 1827 with the 36,547 exported in 1911.

[Illustration: DR. EUGENIO DAHNE,

General Secretary of the Federal Government of Brazil Commission.]




RUBBER-PRODUCING PLANTS—BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION—PRODUCTIVENESS—REGIONS IN
WHICH THEY EXIST


At the present moment, more than 300 species of rubber-producing plants
are known to exist, these being distributed among the tropical regions
of the world. Trees of large size, climbing plants and flexible creepers
containing the precious latex in their branches, trunk and roots, those
vegetable growths from the double point view of quantity and quality
of rubber produce have not an equal importance. The species worthy of
mention belong to four great families:

1.—Euphorbiacan, =Hevea=, =Micrandra=, =Manioh=. 2.—Ulmacean, =Castillôa=
and =Ficus=. 3.—Apocynacean, =Landolphia=, =Hancornia=, =Kickxia=,
=Carpodium= and =Clitandra=. 4.—Asclepiadaceas, =Callotropia=,
=Cynanchum=.

The production of rubber in America is principally furnished by the
heveas, micandra, manioh, castillôa and hancornia; that of Asia by the
ficus; and that of Africa by the landolphia, clitandra and kickxia.

In the Amazonian region of Brazil, there exist about 21 species of
heveas; of these the principal is the hevea braziliensis, which under
the name of “the Pará rubber-tree” deserves to be classed in the front
rank of all the other lactiferous plants in the world. The =hevea
braziliensis= furnishes the most highly esteemed quality of rubber, and
it is the value of that product which determines the prices of all the
other species of rubber brought on to the market.

The heveas are powerful trees of from 20 to 30 metres high, the trunk
which is cylindric in form and of a light ashy color, generally attains
a diameter of from 0ᵐ80 to 1ᵐ20; the branches only commence to grow
at about 15 metres from the ground. The leaves fall in June, but are
speedily substituted by others; it is during this period that the trees
break into flower.

They grow in the valley of the Amazon, which within Brazil embraces the
State of the Amazonas, the federal territory of Acre, almost all the
State of Pará, the North of Matto Grosso and of Goyaz and a part of the
South of Maranhão, or say about 5,000,000 of square kilometres.

Their =habitat= as a general rule is a low and warm region whose
temperature varies between 25° and 30°; without sudden changes during
the course of the year and they favor by preference the watery soils,
just swampy, damp and even marshy; however, at the head-waters of some
rivers, they also live and develop themselves perfectly well in dry and
elevated land. In the Amazonic forests, the average proportion is of one
hevea-tree for 80 trees of other species.

The milky latex circulates from the root to the leaves, existing,
however, in greater abundancy in the trunk, up to a height of about 2
metres from the ground. The heveas in Brazil are generally known by
the term “seringueiras” and the forests in which they are found are
denominated “seringaes.”

The average production of a “seringueira” during the harvest season,
which extends over the space of 6 months, is of 5 kilos of fine rubber
and 750 grs. of sernamby.

The species most appreciated besides the =hevea braziliensis=, are the
=hevea de terra firme=, of which Dr. E. Ule treats in his recent studies,
and which are found on the frontiers of Matto Grosso, the =hevea do
Rio Negro=, called “seringa verdadeira” (the real seringa), the =hevea
benthamiana= and the =hevea dukei=, =Hub=, from the region of the Japurá,
all of them furnishing excellent products.

In the valley of the Amazon exist the =micandras=, belonging to the same
family and producing a rubber of a superior quality, since it is sold
under the name of Fine-Pará. The production of these trees goes to the
market included in the category of hevea, owing to its similarity to
this latter. The =micandra syshenoide= which is the most known species,
is found on the Lower Amazon, in the innumerable islands at the estuary
of the great Amazon River, in the valleys of the Madeira, the Solimões,
the Japurá and the Purús; the natives give it the names of =tapurú=,
=curupita=, =murupita= and =seringarana=. They are leafy trees whose
trunk is of from 0ᵐ80 to 1ᵐ in diametre and from 20 to 25 metres high.
They grow as well in the low lying marshy soil as in the elevated lands,
whence comes their denomination of =tapurú da vargem= and =tapurú de
terra firme=. The tapurú is as lactescent or milky as the hevea and the
latex which it renders is equally rich, seeing that it gives 50 per cent
of fine rubber.

The trees whose product, the =caucho=, occupies the second place in the
general exportation of rubber from Brazil although as a matter of fact
it only commenced to come into the Brazilian markets in the year 1896,
belong to the family of the Ulmaceas. These are the =Castillas= which up
till a short time ago have been classed as of the same species as that
which grows in Mexico and Central America—the Castilla elastica, but
studies made by professor O. Warburg show that they are distinct species
which was thence forward denominated =Castilla Ulei, Warb.=

The “castillôa” is a tree of large proportions, reaching to a height of
from 12 to 18 metres; its trunk with a diametre of from 0ᵐ60 to 0ᵐ90,
is of an ashy gray color, smooth and sparingly branched. The leaves are
large, greater, indeed, on the new plants than on the full grown trees
and its fruit is of an oily nature.

These trees grow in considerable quantities at the sources or head-waters
of the affluents of the Amazon on the latter’s right bank, such as the
Juruá, the Purús, the Madeira, the Tapajóz and the Xingú, and on its
left bank in the valleys of the Japurá, the Iça, the Rio Negro and the
Trombetas Rivers. Abundant “cauchaes” or forests of cautchou trees exist
also in the region of the River Tocantins and of the Araguaya.

The “castillôa” is found therefore in the same regions as those in which
the “seringueiras” flourish; it exacts a warm climate, a clayey or
clayey-silicious soil, but does not thrive in swampy ground or such as is
easily inundated during the rainy season.

The latex is found as much in the bark as in the alburno and each tree
felled produces on an average about 50 litres of latex or say from 18 to
20 kilos of rubber.

“Ceará” is the mundial denomination of another quality of Brazilian
rubber, the rubber of the =Maniçoba= tree. The maniçoba =manihot
glaziovii= is a handsome tree 10 to 15 metres high, and a native of the
Northeastern region of Brazil. Its trunk presents a diametre of from 20
to 50 centimetres and it possesses few branches; its wood-fibres are weak
and light. The cortex, which possesses lactiferous vessels in abundance,
is protected by a silicose layer, easily removable. It is a plant of
rapid growth.

According to a classification made by Dr. Ule, there are four species
of manioh, the =m. glaziovii=, the =m. piauhyensis=, the =m. dichotoma=
and the =m. heptaphylla=, the which exist almost throughout all Central
Brazil, being specially abundant in Ceará, Piauhy and Bahia.

Little exigent, it thrives in regions where the temperature oscillates
between 22° and 36°, on low-lying ground and it develops itself well in
lands of great altitude, in which the thermometric average temperature is
about 15°, resisting even the hoar-frost.

It is indifferent to this tree whether the climate be damp or dry, as
long as the soil is dry.

The species most appreciated are those from Piauhy and the Jequié
(“sertão” or back-woods of Bahia). Those of Piauhy present two varieties:
the white and the black species, the white being the most renowned. They
are of small size, with abundant foliage and thick bark and darkish stem
and give plenty of the milky latex, the average being 1,200 grammes per
tree. Those of the Jequié, which grow between the rivers Paraguassú to
the north and of the Contas to the south, are a shrub-tree whose trunk
does not exceed 30 centimetres in diametre. The bark is fine and of light
clear color; it produces about 500 grammes of rubber.

The mangabeira (Hancornia speciosa) is a slender and crooked shrub-tree,
3 to 4 metres high, and abounds on the high-lying table-lands or plateaux
in the interior of Brazil. The trunk has a diameter of from 0ᵐ30 to 0ᵐ35;
is scantily leaved; the fruit is eatable and has a very agreeable taste.

A plant of an extraordinary resisting power, it defies the inclemency
of the climate, the absence of rains, the scarcity of humidity and of
nourishment from the soil. It predominates in the =catingas= of the
Northern States, in the =carrascaes= of Goyaz and in the =cerrados=
of S. Paulo, which means to say, that it is found from Maranhão to S.
Paulo, now in the Interior, as in the mountain-range of the Mangabeiras
between Maranhão and Goyaz, in the central Chapada of Minas, in the
Parecis of Matto Grosso and in S. Paulo in the zone comprised between the
Paranápanema River and the Rio Grande, tributaries of the Paraná River,
and again on the littoral, which is the case from Bahia northwards as far
as Ceará.

There are several different varieties of this plant, there being no
indications, however, tending to point out any one of these preferable
to another with regard to the question of its yield. The latex is of a
bluish tint, its richness in rubber varying greatly. Each mangabeira
supplies on an average one kilogram of rubber.

Besides the plants mentioned, there are still many others in Brazil which
furnish rubber, but which continue to grow without being taken advantage
of, on account of the little profit they give.

To speak only of those which exploited on a small scale have yet supplied
the Brazilian markets with an appreciable product, we may yet mention
the =Massaranduba=, =Mimosups elata=, and =Frei-Allem=, gigantic trees
found from the Amazon and Pará to Rio de Janeiro and Minas, abundant in
the milky latex, which being coagulated produces a rubber very similar to
gutta-percha, to which it serves as a substitute in all the latter’s most
important applications; and the =Sorva=, =Couma utilis=, =Muell. Arg.=,
which grow in Pará and in the Amazon valley, the latex of which, the
=leite de sorva=, enters, with a small coefficient into the production of
rubber in these two States.




EXTRACTION OF RUBBER, METHODS AND PROCESSES


The great organic and biologic differences which exist between
rubber-trees, exact divers processes of preparation in order to obtain a
complete utilization of the productive capacity of each.

It is, however, interesting before entering into a description of the
different processes adopted in Brazil, to here state what the chemists
think as to what rubber really is.

Rubber is a carburate of hydrogen which in the shape of white globules
more or less elongated, are found suspended in the milky latex. The
composition of those globules, although even yet, badly defined, is
represented by the formula (C¹⁰ H¹⁶)ⁿ. Rubber is generally considered
as a derivative of the Isoprina, into which it transforms itself when
submitted to the action of dry heat, as Bouchardat demonstrated by his
experiments in 1879. Treating the isoprina in a strong solution of
chloridic acid, an interesting body is obtained, which reminds one of
rubber on account of its elastic properties. Wallach, Tilden, Weber,
Harries and others gave themselves up to accurate studies upon the
composition of rubber; nevertheless, up till to-day, however, no definite
result has as yet been arrived at.

The latex, a thick liquid which has the appearance of animal milk,
circulates in special vessels, distributed diversely in the organism of
certain plants.

The following are the results of the analysis obtained from the latex of
the =hevea braziliensis= by Seelingmann, Scott and Bamber:

                    Seelingmann      Scott         Bamber
    Water            55 a 56%      22 - 32%     55¹⁵ - 55⁵⁶%
    Rubber                32%      37 - 13%     41²⁹ - 32  %
    Proteine         2% to 3%            2⁷¹%    2¹⁸ -  2⁰³%
    Resin              traces            3⁴⁴%        -  2⁰³%
    Ash                                  0²³%        -  0⁴¹%
    Sugar                                4¹⁷%        -  0³⁶%
    Oily substances       9⁷%       traces           -

Specific weight: Seelingmann, 1.019. Bamber: 1.018.

It is advisable to note, that the proportion of water may vary a great
deal, influenced sometimes by the season being either wet or dry, and at
other times by the weakness or vigor of the tree at the occasion of its
being tapped.

The quantities of proteine, resin and ash are dependent on the chemical
composition of the soil, those quantities affect the quality of the
rubber, which is the more elastic, resistent and durable the smaller the
proportion of those elements.

In the coagulation of the latex, the resin incorporates itself in
the rubber, it becoming difficult to separate it, which, however,
is necessary; the proteine or albuminous matter is the cause of the
developing of the bacteria which occasion the putrefaction of the
manufactured article.

The method employed in Brazil in the extraction of the latex and in the
preparation of rubber from the heveas trees, is the same as that which
was taught by the natives and it is a remarkable thing, that due to the
excellency of the product resulting therefrom, it is considered even
to-day as the best system.

The great production of rubber in Brazil, is due to the exploitation
of the natural seringaes. A “seringal” or, better said “seringaes” in
the plural sense, are the forests where the hevea trees flourish among
other numerous specimens of luxuriant vegetation, and in those regions
everybody, i.e., all the able-bodied men, occupy themselves with the
extraction of rubber and are known as “seringueiros.”

In order to exploit the “seringal,” operations are commenced by the
construction on the bank of the river, at a place easy of access for
navigation, of a large rustic edifice with out-buildings and various
sheds. The general edifice serves as a dwelling-place for the owner or
his representative and includes a general store or shop with a tavern
which does business in selling all the necessary articles required in
or connected with the life of exploiting the “seringal,” a store-house
for depositing the rubber and an office or counting-house. The sheds are
the rudimentary habitation-huts of the “seringueiros” and are sometimes
constructed in the interior of the forests, so as to facilitate to a
greater degree the work which they have in hand.

As soon as the forest is explored and the seringueiras discovered,
=estrades= are opened, these being winding roads cut in the undergrowth
and brush-wood with the “facão” (a species of large pruning-knife) and
these roads connect a 100 or 150 rubber trees and they lead back to
their original starting point. At sunrise, that is to say, at 6 o’clock
in the morning, the seringueiro armed with a “terçado” a sort of spear,
a fowling-piece or sporting-gun, a small axe or hatchet, a pail and a
large number of “tigelinhas,” commences his work. The hatchet is the
instrument employed for tapping the trees; it takes the form of a common
pole-axe, being, however, generally of cast iron and with the edge of
the blade blunt rather than sharp, and from 3 to 4 centimetres broad.
The tigelinhas are small vessels or cups of tin-plate with a capacity of
about one hundred grammes and of a conical shape cut off at the top.

The seringueiro commences by striking the trees with the hatchet, whose
handle is about a metre long, which permits of his making incisions at
about from 3 to 3½ metres from the ground. That operation has for its
object to make the latex ascend from the roots; the milk that oozes out
is utilized as “sernamby.” Two days afterwards, the regular extraction
commences, a hatchet with a shorter handle being then used.

To bring this extraction about, “seringueiro” makes the first incision
at two metres from the ground, but those incisions must not pierce the
cambium and the wood and are as a general rule made at an inclination
of 25°. At the lower part of the incisions made by the blows, the
“tigelinhas” are fixed, whose sharp and cutting corner penetrates easily
into the bark of the tree. The seringueiro operates thus upon all the
trees of his road, and this work which occupies him about from 2 to 3
hours being completed, he takes the pail capable of holding 10 litres and
recommences his round, gathering into that receptacle the milk contained
in the tapping cups, which now empty are boxed one into the other and
deposited close to the trunk of each tree.

After that second round and in order that the milk shall not become
deteriorated, commences the most delicate operation, that of the smoking
process.

For that operation, the seringueiro is supplied with a “boião,” a kind of
earthen funnel-shaped chimney, a form made like a spatula or putty-knife
and a kind of basin “cuia,” like a dry gourd, made from the half of the
fruit of the cabaceiro (crescencia cuyeté).

The fire made with blocks of urucury (Ataléa speciosa Martius) or with
fire-wood of massaranduba, rich in oily substances, being kindled, the
seringueiro places the “boião” upon it, the function of this latter being
to canalize the smoke so that it escapes at the top, which is open.

Through the loop of a cord hanging near to the “boião” the form is passed
and sustained by the “seringueiro” who gives it a gyratory movement;
with the “cuya” or gourd, he pours the latex into the part scooped out
of the spatula, which he carries off immediately to the smoke. The latex
thickens and forming a thin skin upon the which another coating of latex
is poured out, which is also passed to the smoke. Those successive and
alternate operations form the skins, large balls of rubber, weighing from
20 to 60 kilos, which are the type exported from Brazil. The smoke acting
as a solidifyer and at the same time a disinfectant by the presence
of creosote, acetic acid, etc., kills all the bacteria that produce
putrefaction and hastens by its heat the evaporation of the water.

The rubber thus formed is of a superior quality, but when, however, the
curds still deposited in the basin, are incorporated with it, the quality
becomes damaged, being then quoted as medium fine. The portion of milk
which remains adhering to the receptacle or which surrounds the boião and
which thickens freely, is reunited into one single skin, and constitutes
the “sernamby.”

On the following day the work recommences, the seringueiro making new
incisions about 7 centimetres below the first, and continuing thus until
he reaches the ground.

To that series of blows in the vertical sense, 35 on the average, is
given the name arreação. In each seringueira 2 of these arreações can be
made per year.

That process which with small variations is employed in all Amazonia,
produces, as is known, the best rubber in the world. A seringal
may contain in accordance with its size from 40 to 800 roads. Each
seringueiro exploits 2 roads; in which he works alternatively. The
daily gathering varies between 2 and 8 litres of milk, but an average
of 5 litres can be taken for a road which contains 120 seringueiras
of 35 centimetres diametre. As each arreação has 35 incisions and the
seringueiras supporting 2 “arreações,” we have thus for each road 70 days
or 140 days for the 2 roads; 700 litres of milk produce 400 kilos or in
other words 1.666 grammes per tree.

There are “seringaes,” however, in which that average is considerably
greater, a medium of 3 kilos per tree not being an exaggeration in some
rivers.

Contrary to the almost sedentary life of the seringueiros, the extractors
of the caucho (known as caucheiros) are of nomadic habits, and this is so
by reason of the barbarous process employed in the exploitation of those
trees which is a ruinous one.

The extraction of the latex of the “castillôa” can be done in the same
way as that of the latex of the heveas; the caucheiros allege, however,
that the cupim introducing itself into the wounds made by the incisions
soon causes the death of the plant. Thus they argue that if the tree is
condemned, the best way is to cut it down so as to obtain the greatest
benefit possible out of it, by the complete utilization of the latex
which each tree contains. That reasoning, however, has no foundation in
fact.

       *       *       *       *       *

The exploitation of the castillôa is done in the following manner: the
“caucheiro” penetrates into the forest and marks each castillôa tree that
he finds, with a cut from his knife, which incisions correspond to a sign
of possession for extraction later on. Once he has discovered a certain
number of these trees, he constructs a temporary wooden hut for himself
and then begins his work. In the first place he clears the brush-wood
around each tree and cleans away the undergrowth from the ground, he then
opens small cavities in the lower part of the trunk into which he fixes
the “porringers,” small vessels made of tin, which are to receive the
latex. This done he strikes the tree with oblique “entalhas” of from 1
to 1½ metres in length, canalizing the latex which commences to run from
the extensive wounds, by means of mud gutters. At the end of 24 hours the
little tin vessels are full and their contents are then all poured into a
pail, the “caucheiro” commencing thereafter to cut down the tree, so as
to get the full benefit of the latex, existing in the superior part of
its trunk. The tree as a general rule is cut at a point above that where
the incisions were made, the tree thus remaining suspended above the
ground at one end by the lower part of the trunk, where it remains fixed
and at the other by its own branches. Along the whole length of the trunk
at about a distance of an arm’s length from each other, new circular
incisions are made and in corresponding cavities on the ground are placed
the receiving cups. The latex thus gathered is collected into a pail.

The thickening is done with a solution of common soap about 125 grammes
to a pail of water, two pailfuls of that solution being necessary to
thicken 30 litres of latex. They also employ the juice of a liane
called =vetilla= which by the description given seems to belong to the
convolvulas family—the =Ipomea patatas=.

The thickening process takes place in rectangular holes of 1 metre long
and half a metre broad, whose clayey sides are well paved and into them
the latex is poured, care being taken that it is then covered up with
palm leaves to prevent the entry of rain water. They thus obtain the
caucho planks (rubber in cakes), which arrive in the market full of
impurities, that depreciate its value very much and it is not at all a
rare thing that water exists in cavities in the interior of it, thereby
increasing the weight and making the transport dearer.

The portions of the latex which flow out along the length of the trunk or
fall into the cavities after that the cups have been taken away, thicken
itself freely and form the “sernamby” of caucho, to-day much appreciated
in the rubber markets, because of its being purer and not offering errors
in weight.

Each adult tree furnishes on the average from 50 to 56 litres of latex
or in other words nearly 30 kilos of rubber. Each cake of the size above
mentioned weighs nearly 60 kilos; it is thus necessary to cut down three
trees so as to obtain one cake.

The trees cut down sprout and commence to grow again, but eight years
are necessary to elapse before they can be exploited anew.

No accord has so far been established as to the best methods of
extraction to be employed for the different species of maniçoba, nor as
to the period most appropriate, the duration of the tapping or the yield
of the wild trees or planted trees of different ages.

The system adopted for the natural maniçoba, consisting in the tapping
of the subterranean organs, has been applied to cultivated maniçoba; the
incisions are made in a transversal sense and have the form of a V with
the angle more or less rounded.

The latex is gathered in the ground, at the bottom of a small cavity,
opened up on the occasion of the discovery of the parts destined to be
tapped; as a rule the worker covers the bottom of the cavity with a coat
of clay in powder, in order to prevent the penetration of the latex and
its mixing with the sandy soil; the employment of tigelinhas is desirable
or of pots of glazed clay, refractory to rust.

The latex thickens during the day, forming a sort of flat ball or
biscuit of rubber, which goes on augmenting as the tapping process is
multiplied. At the end of a week the rubber which has been obtained, is
gathered together and washed in cold water, with a view of eliminating
the remains of the serum and other impurities. This method, although
primitive, permits of the production of pure rubber. The trunks and
branches of the maniçoba are also cut; however, such system occasions
great inconvenience. The extensive flaws heal up with difficulty, as the
bark of the tree is relatively thin the lactiferous vessels are located
in the deep layers; it is not a rare thing that the death of the tree
is caused thereby or that the attack of rodent insects or mushrooms is
thereby facilitated. It may be of importance to note, that the incisions
made simultaneously on the trunk, the branches and the underground parts,
speedily exhaust the maniçobeiras; and so the system of an alternate
cutting is preferable.

The tappings are practiced during the first six months of the year and
extend themselves over a period of from 50 to 60 days. Owing to the lack
of data, the average yield of production, which varies according to the
age of the trees, cannot be determined, however, the average production
of the planted maniçobas may under reserve, be calculated to reach during
the space of 60 days 120, 180, 240, and 300 grammes per tree of 2, 3, 4
and 5 years respectively, in accordance with a calculation made by Dr. L.
Zehnter.

The actual cost price in the plantations does not exceed 1$500 per kilo,
and might be reduced through an improvement in the systems employed;
the cost price of rubber from the native maniçoba is higher, due to the
dearness of labor and of freights.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is so far no process which may be called the best for extracting
rubber from the mangabeira; the process in use varies with the region,
all of them, however, leading to the complete extinction of the plant.

Under the pretext of the cupim destroying the plant, attacking the
incisions that have been made, the latex is usually extracted at a small
height from the ground. In the “sertões” or wild woodlands of Bahia,
Pernambuco and Parahyba, the extraction is done by making a spiral
cutting from the thickest branches to the ground, where the cavity is
made for receiving the latex.

Nevertheless, the incisions with the cup attached is now being employed,
in the same manner as is customary with the seringueira; for that
purpose, the exploiters make horizontal incisions or in shape of a V,
with a small instrument called an =alegre=, penetrating the entire
coating of the bark, in the full length of the trunk, from the thickest
branches down to the base, about 45 centimetres distance one from another.

The latex is thickened, sometimes simply with water in the proportion
of 3 to 1, and at other times with chlorate of sodium alone, or with
a mixture of alum, as is customary in Bahia and in S. Paulo, or now
again by the action of alum-stone, double sulphate of aluminium and of
potassium as is done in Pernambuco, Parahyba, and Rio Grande do Norte.
All those processes present serious inconveniences, such as the entry of
water augmenting the weight, the baneful effects and dampness arising
from the use of a large proportion of salt, or the loss of elasticity
due to the last mentioned process, which turns the rubber cracky and
resinous. The smoking process seems in every way to be advisable whenever
the richness of the milky-latex in rubber is perfectly comparable to that
of the hevea.

Whilst it is affirmed that the production per tree is from 3 to 5
kilogrammes it is more prudent to calculate the average capacity of each
tree as at 1 kilogramme.




THE ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF RUBBER EXPLOITATION


The economic organization of the exploitation of rubber in the Amazonic
valley still remains in its rudimentary condition, continuing almost
exactly on the same lines as those adopted when the production of this
article—one of the principal sources of the wealth of Brazil—first began
to open up.

This unaltered condition of affairs in the modifying of the economical
processes, is the consequence of the continuance of certain conditions
such as the existence of vast regions still entirely unexplored, the
progressive penetration of the seringueiros guided by the course of the
rivers into far away regions where rapid means of communication are
completely lacking, the scarcity of labor, and the necessity of capital
being embarked in the extraction of rubber.

The régime of private property is still limited, and does not extend
beyond a few kilometres into the Interior, starting from the banks of
the rivers, since the greater part of the lands still continue to be
the property of the States either of Amazonas or of Pará, and—in the
territory of the Acre—of the Federal Government.

With the object of peopling the rubber-producing regions endeavors are
being made to facilitate the acquiring of properties by furnishing their
owners with adequate guarantees of protection, special Public Departments
having already been created in the State of Amazonas and Pará devoted to
the fiscalization of the régime of lands; and the régime of lands in the
Acre Territory is about to be regulated at once by the Federal Government
in accordance with the determinations set forth in the new economic
measure known as the Rubber Defense Act.

The proprietory question originated itself in the concession of
lands granted under certain conditions such as that of its effective
exploitation and cultivation, colonization, etc., and by the legitimation
of the possession. These last were established in the following manner:

The explorer who penetrated into the forest in search of seringaes,
examined the banks of the river by which he went up and when he verified
the existence of a favorable zone, he landed and after a careful
exploration under the direction of specialist-workmen called “matteiros”
(foresters) he settled down and gave himself up to the exploitation of
the “seringal” he selected.

That occupation of virgin ground and its being made use of constituted
the act of possession, the first step towards acquiring the property. In
order to definitely assure the dominion of the lands selected, it became
necessary to obtain a title of ownership from the Government of the
State in which these lands were located, this being drawn up only after
that the respective marking out and survey by an authorized engineer or
surveyor, the depositing of the respective plans, the verification that
no anterior rights or claims existed on the part of third parties, as
also the payment of the respective taxes being satisfied, which last
averaged about 5$000 per hectare.

Only after that all these formalities had been complied with, was the
concession granted definitely, and the possession considered as complete.
The title deeds of the property with the respective specifications is
registered in special blocks, which will serve as proof in case of
future dispute and will furnish authentic documents in place of the
property-titles that may have been mislaid or lost. Once the concession
is legalized and the possession marked out, the property rights are
considered irrefutable.

The dominion of the lands being assured, their usefulness will depend
upon the co-existence of two essential factors—labor and capital.

In the regions of the Amazonian valley, sparingly peopled by the want of
direct immigration, the work is done by the natives and principally by
Cearenses, people from Ceará.

Under the general designation of =Cearenses= are comprised the
populations of the northeast of the country from Bahia to Piauhy, a
strong race endowed with rare energy. Having immigrated from their native
state fleeing from privations to which the periodical dry seasons reduce
them, they arrive completely without the means of subsistence, it being
necessary for the owners of the “seringas” who contract their services
to take measures for their transport, alimentation and maintenance in
the seringaes until with the delivery of the rubber collected, they find
themselves in a position to liquidate the debts that they have contracted
and the expenses that have been occasioned.

On the other hand in their turn the owners of seringaes not disposing of
capital are placed under the necessity of raising loans with which to
defray the exploitation of their lands. These resources are furnished
them by the traders, part in money and part in merchandise, these traders
being known as =aviadores= whilst the proprietors are called patrons or
aviados.

The extensive credits opened by the traders constitute acts of
confidence, being guaranteed more by the activity and initiative of the
proprietors of the seringaes, than by their respective properties; the
heavy burdens with which these loanings or advances of money are weighed
down, have their origin in the risk which is run by advancing such
capital, due to the difficulties of collecting the debts contracted and
the far distant nature of the lands given in guarantee. It frequently
happens that the traders do not dispose of sufficient means for carrying
out all these lending operations in which case they fall back upon
the exporting houses, who advance them the necessary money, against
a contract to hand over the rubber at a certain date and at prices
previously fixed.

Thus is established a successive dependency of the seringueiro on the
owner of the property, this latter in his turn on the merchant-trader and
finally of the merchant-trader upon the exporting house.

Thereafter it is seen how grievously the system of want of capital acts
on the whole system on the exportation of rubber and the long series of
intermediaries.

Let us see now what is the capital which the owner of the seringal
requires to possess for an exploitation of say 200 roads.

A seringal with 200 roads exacts altogether the work of 100 men, whose
engagements in the region where they reside and their transport as far
as the “seringal” costs on an average 40:000$000 and to each one of them
is supplied a sum of 350$000 destined to defray the costs of purchase
of the indispensable material for making a commencement with the work
of exploitation; out of an initial sum estimated at from 75:000$000 to
80:000$000 including casual expenses.

Arrived at their destination, the seringueiros, as they find themselves
completely without means, continue to be a burden on the budget of their
contractors during the period of the clearing the forests of brush-wood
and undergrowth, and the cutting of roads, which are the preliminaries to
the gathering in of the rubber. Up till the date of the final delivery,
which takes place from 6 to 7 months afterwards, the proprietor expends
nearly 100:000$000 with the feeding and maintenance of the seringueiros,
which is but the preface to a total sum of 180:000$000 inscribed on the
books of the aviador or merchant-trader as being the indebtedness of the
owner of the seringal.

This latter in order to meet the charges of the up-keep of the
seringueiros, establishes “vendas” or selling-stores, by means of which
he supplies not only the goods of first necessity for consumption, but
also the tools, utensils and, indeed, everything that is required for the
proper exploitation of the “seringal.”

These “vendas” or supply-stores are stocked by the merchant-trader
of Belém and Manáos, who send them periodically in steamers or steam
launches, the necessary merchandise. According to the season of the
year, the rainy or the dry season, the greater or less the distance to
be navigated, in short, in accordance with the condition of navigability
of the rivers, the trips are made fortnightly, quarterly or perhaps only
twice a year.

The merchandise dispatched is debited to the owner of the “seringal” at
the invoice price, augmented by the high expenses for insurance, freight
and a commission which varies from 20 to 30 per cent according to the
time-term stipulated for the payment in cash or the delivery of the
rubber.

The owner of the “seringal” in his turn re-sells in retail the
merchandise received, putting on a high profit to its original price; the
seringueiros who already pay interest at the rate of 20 per cent upon the
advance of the 350$000 which is made to them at the time of their being
contracted, are obliged to supply their needs exclusively in the store of
the proprietor of the “seringal” and to hand him the rubber which they
may have gathered in payment thereof.

The initial supplying of the utensils amounting to 200$000 added to
the cost of the journey which runs for account of the seringueiro
himself, absorb the 350$000 of the advance; and his expenses, whilst
the extraction of the rubber is proceeding—which lasts for 6 or 7
months—totals up to about 1:000$000, so that when he comes to hand over
the rubber, he is already responsible to the proprietor of the “seringal”
for an amount of about 350$000 including the payment for the renting of
the road explored.

His production being on an average of about 400 kilos (in certain regions
it is much greater), the worker finishes his enterprise with a very small
profit and it is not a rare case that he is not able to satisfy all his
indebtedness, a circumstance, this latter, which keeps him continually
dependent upon the owner of the “seringal.”

On handing over the rubber, the conditions of payment are adjusted and
these are generally made in one of the two following ways: either the
seringueiro sells the rubber directly to the proprietor of the “seringal”
at a reduction of one-third upon the prices ruling in the markets of
Belém or Manáos; or he encharges him to sell it in the referred-to market
with a discount of 35 kilos of rubber or with a discount of from 10 to 15
per cent of the net price of such sale, given in payment of the renting
of the road exploited.

This defective economic organization of the exploitation of rubber has,
as its consequence, the high costs of production which to-day oscillate
between 3$000 to 3$500 per kilo. This disadvantageous situation,
however, is not a permanent one and may be remedied.

We shall leave for a special chapter the explanation of the means
recently adopted for bettering the condition of the seringueiros,
augmenting their productive capacity and recompensing them more justly
for their work.




TRANSPORTS AND FREIGHTS


The problem of transports and freight continues to be one of the most
palpitating questions in Brazil, notwithstanding the great progress in
this particular made during the last 10 years.

The considerable increase in the mercantile marine and the incessant
construction of the numerous railroads of penetration, have not been able
to keep pace with the extraordinary development of the country and its
notable economic expansion, the national commerce continuing to feel the
want of further means of transport and to suffer from the very high rates
of freights.

In Amazonia, the difficulty of communication has become still more felt
because of the vast region and territories embraced in this great State,
sparingly peopled and whose centres of production are located so far
distant from the exporting markets of Manáos and Belém de Pará.

Watered in every direction by innumerable great rivers, tributaries
of the great river—the Amazon—the greatest in the world, the Amazonic
region still remains to a very great part unexplored, inestimable riches
susceptible of being extracted, lying unutilized, in virtue of the
deficiency in navigation; in fact, if the principal rivers are navigated
regularly to some extent, even though sparingly, others leading to
immensely rich regions are very rarely navigated by either ship or boats,
which might assure the transport of the products gathered.

Many and divers are the circumstances which concur towards bringing
about this state of affairs, but the most important in resumé is that of
the want of capital for the construction of ships and the establishment
of regular lines of fluvial navigation as also the obstacles offered
either by the irregular courses of some rivers obstructed by waterfalls,
shoots and rapids, or simply obstructed by the trunks of trees and other
materials or by the diminutive volume of water during the dry seasons
which makes impossible navigation of even ordinary draught.

One of the most interesting phases of the Amazonian problem is, however,
in the regulating and increasing of the navigation of the rivers, with
the object of assuring ample transport facilities and the approximation
to the centres of production with the consuming markets. The opening up
of the ways of fluvial communication is an essential condition to the
progress of the Amazonic region, by the lesser expenditure required by
transport upon water in comparison with land transportation which in
those regions would be particularly difficult and costly.

The steamers and boats which set out from Manáos or Belém for the
Interior, make the passage generally, over-charged with merchandise
which by reason of accumulation and its defective packing suffers not
rarely serious damages which has the result of bringing about a notable
increment in prices. As a general rule the cargo being greater than the
space requisite to its accommodation, makes the navigation extremely
difficult, the steamers thus not being able to make head-way against
the current, which flows at the rate of from 3 to 5 miles an hour, or
desiring to diminish the expense in the consumption of coal, seek out the
waters the less agitated and approach as much as possible the banks of
the river.

The want of minute hydrographic charts and the imprudence of the
captains, as also of the masters of steam launches and other floating
material, have, as a consequence, the bringing about of frequent
strandings, which even though they may not cause damage to the cargo
involve interruptions in the trip sufficiently prejudicial.

The unloadings are made frequently on the banks of the rivers under
little favorable conditions, by reason of the want of wharves; are
very slow and occasion besides lamentable delays, very heavy expenses
principally for the packages of great weight.

One of the causes which most determine the dearness of transport in
Amazonia, is the supply of combustibles to the steamers, these latter
taking in coal only at the port of departure in Belém or Manáos, and this
being consumed, purchase wood fuel along the route just as they require
it, and for a high price, subjecting themselves thus to the delays
incident to loading, at times very great. Coal mines in the basin of the
Caquetá have been discovered, but so far it has not been possible to
derive any benefit from them, owing to the want of the necessary studies
and analysis, which only now the Federal Government is beginning to have
made.

For the betterment of this state of things the Federal Government also
pretends to contract with a large public company for the establishment of
coal depots and combustible oil, at the most appropriate points of the
rivers on which the greatest movement takes place in the valley of the
Amazon, so that the steamers may be supplied for prices according to a
tabular statement previously approved for each year.

The descent of the floating material by the rivers is much less onerous,
as the consumption of combustibles is thereby considerably diminished,
thanks to the current which gives an easy impulsion to the floating
material; the trips are notwithstanding slow, much time being lost in
picking up cargo, almost exclusively rubber, on the banks of the rivers.

The irregularity in the navigation either due to the deficiency of the
floating material or by the natural obstacles that the flooding of the
rivers bring about, cause extensive prejudice, as it obliges the large
cargoes of merchandise upon whose price high interest is collected and
occasions them considerable loss of goods deteriorated by their remaining
for a long time in sheds and by the damaging effect of heat and dampness.

From thence arises the lamentable dearness of life and the bad
alimentation, with their evil results on the health of the inhabitants of
those far-away-regions.

The retention in the seringaes of large stocks of rubber deprived
of the means of transport must also not be forgotten and its coming
simultaneously on to the market at certain times, being taken advantage
of by speculators is an important cause of the fall in prices which
affects the interests of producers to an appreciable degree.

Regularity and frequency in navigation, permitting successive and regular
supplies of rubber would diminish in notable proportions the cost of
production, since it would cheapen the cost of labor and avoid the great
oscillations usual in the prices.

In order to obtain that desideratum it is not sufficient to create new
lines of navigation nor to augment the number of floating material
or better their conditions, but it is necessary to adopt certain
complementary measures. Thus in the impossibility of preparing from the
outset minute hydrographic charts, a measure which would require great
expenditure; it were advisable in order to make navigation more secure
to indicate by means of small light houses and illuminated buoys of
acetyline, the dangerous points which it is desirable to avoid.

In order to obviate the difficulties created by the formation of sand
banks, by the accumulation of trunks of trees, and of obstacles of all
kinds, it is necessary that attention be paid constantly to the cleansing
of the rivers and dragging them, in cases where the obstructions cannot
be removed by other means and the construction of railways and wagon
roads connecting the navigable points.

It would be of the greatest utility to bring about the extension and
opening up of telegraphic lines joining the producing centres with the
central markets, such measures would have the most beneficient results
as much for the owners of seringaes as for the shipowners, these latter
being once aware of such facilities would cause their ships to be
directed to the points where they were required to discharge merchandise
or take in rubber or vice-versa and thus avoid all uncertainty upon
the advantages to be reaped from those trips, because of the want of
knowledge of the cargoes that are being reserved for them, and those who
are in contact with them in the markets where the product is sold may be
advised as to the quotations and the market prices of the merchandise so
that they may take advantage of the most favorable times for effecting
their transactions.

The message presented by His Excellency Marchal Hermes da Fonseca,
President of the Republic of the United States of Brazil on the third of
May of this current year, made special reference to the services of the
radio-telegraph in the territory of the Acre, expressing himself in the
following terms:

“The three radio-telegraphic stations that have been contracted for in
December of 1910, are now in full working order, those of the Rio Branco
and Senna Madueira having been inaugurated in September of 1911 and in
February of this year that of Cruzeiro de Sul, which besides speaking
with those two and therefore with Manáos, communicates also with Iquitos
in the Republic of Perú.”

In order to complete this very useful improvement ordered to be done in
such a happy hour, there were also contracted for two other stations, one
of these being in Xapury and the other in Tarauacá, places having a great
future before them and already containing an appreciable population as
well as a notable material development.

With the installation of those two stations, the territory will be
perfectly well equipped in regard to the question of telegraphic
communications.

As a consequence of the dearness and the difficulties in the means of
transport we get the excessive rises in freight, which at times are equal
to and are often greater than the value of the merchandise transported;
the truth is that the crisis in rubber made them suffer a certain fall
and we no longer see such a thing happen as that the shipowner pays for
the price of his steamers in two round trips.

The dominating principle is that of liberty of commerce. In order to
assure regular services on the principal rivers, the Federal Government
as well as the Governments of the States of Amazonas and Pará subsidize
certain companies whose tables of freight charges are approved by the
Public Powers. That these are still very high is shown by the fact of
competition which in certain lines takes place between the subsidized
companies and private shipowners; the latter, however, not being able
to go beyond the tariff tables of the former, they nevertheless obtain
freights and passengers which proportion them high profits, demonstrating
thus that the tables of freight tariffs of the subsidized companies are
still a long way from the maximum of reduction.

The Commercial, Industrial and Agricultural Congress which took place
in Manáos from the 22nd to 27th of February of 1910, considering this
position, resolved to recommend to the Public Powers the remodelling of
the actual freight tariffs principally in that part of them which relate
to alimentary goods, necessary to the sustaining of the extractors of
rubber and in the sense of their being substantially cheapened.

Even to-day one of the best businesses in the Amazonic regions consists
in chartering steamers for trafficking on the rivers.

If the freight rates on the sections served by the subsidized lines
are high, greater still are these on the less favored sections where
the rapids of the rivers flowing among the seringaes, make navigation
difficult, because in these latter there being no freight tables, they
make the price according to their judgment, such prices of transport
being contracted directly according to the circumstances of the occasion
with the shipper, who has to pay the price as the masters of the steamers
are pleased or resolved to charge.

The owners of seringaes subject themselves to the heavy burdens which
they are bound to put up with, in the hope of escaping the damage that
the retention of their produce for want of transport would cause them.

It is not only the fluvial navigation freights that are much too
burdensome, for the freights for ocean navigation are also burdened with
this grave defect and thus it is that despite the fact of the distance
which separate Brazil from New York and from London, is only half that
between the consuming markets and the east, the freights for the latter
are incomparably less. It behooves the Governments of countries producing
rubber in South America to come to an arrangement so as to confer
adequate premiums on the navigation companies to Europe and to the United
States, who cheapen their freights and cut down in a satisfactory manner
the duration of the voyage.




INTERNAL MARKETS FOR RUBBER—ORGANIZATION AND WORKING—TYPES AND QUOTATIONS


Located in the centre of the most important rubber producing region of
the world, Belém and Manáos, the capitals of the two great states of the
north, are, in Brazil, the principal markets of that product. Nearly 90
per cent of the Brazilian exportation proceeds from there, the 16,000
tons of rubber which each of these markets export annually gives place to
a considerable mass of business.

If it be true that the commercial transactions gyrate around equal
quantities of rubber, Belém has the advantage over Manáos, because it is
the seat of a great part of the large exporting houses that operate in
the two capitals. Its geographical situation which permits of more rapid
communication with the markets of the south, and with foreign ports,
contributes also towards its greater commercial importance.

The uses and customs are identical in the two markets. Commerce obeys
a rule above all unfavorable to the sellers who cannot put a value on
their merchandise but are forced before all things to accept the price
imposed by the buyers. That disadvantageous condition of dependency
is the natural outcome of the deficient economic organization in the
exploitation of the rubber industry in the valley of the Amazon.
Reference has already been made in another place to the burdensome
commercial relations between the seringueiros and the patrons or
proprietors of seringaes and between the same patrons and the commercial
traders. The same vices and defects are to be found in the relations
between the commercial traders and the great exporting houses. Those
latter, possessors of large capital and united together in the common
interests, dominate the market, which, weakened by successive crises and
always in a precarious state cannot oppose them an efficacious resistance.

That situation can only be modified in the case of the actual economic
and commercial methods, which place in the hands of the merchant-trader
all the responsibility of the conduction of business in the place,
without at the same time arming them with the means of defence against
unrestricted speculations.

The merchant-trader’s houses are the intermediaries between the
seringueiros and the exporting houses. But, their principal function
is that of furnishing the seringueiro during the year all the goods
necessary to sustain him and his employes as well as supplying him with
tools, utensils, wearing apparel and in fact, everything that may be
necessary to his life in the seringaes.

This supplying is done on credit, that is to say, against the remittance
of rubber produced by the borrower and which is sold on its arrival by
the merchant-trader to the exporting houses.

The merchant-trader thus requires large capital so as to meet the
engagements that he assumes in the market with the great and numerous
supplies, which he is obliged to make.

It is incumbent on him also to transport the same for which he nearly
always employs steamers of his own, in order to bring the merchandise to
its destination in far-away regions, bringing back on the return trip the
rubber collected by his aviados, i.e., his borrowers of the seringaes.

The responsibilities assumed become due on the occasion of the arrival
of the cargoes of rubber. In fact, it is exactly at this moment that the
merchant-trader is most in need of money, because besides the imperious
duty of paying the amount of his debts and the immediate necessity which
he has of furnishing new supplies to his clients the aviados, he has
still yet expenses to disburse with the repair and fitting out of the
steamers, which owing to the bad conditions in the navigation of the
rivers return nearly always in a damaged condition; balances to pay to
the seringueiros whose debts were relatively small or advances to make to
those whose production was inferior in value to the supply sent, but who
required a new resource under the danger of otherwise not being able ever
to liquidate their debt.

Thus it is that the aviador or merchant-trader has no other remedy, but
to sell without delay the rubber which has been consigned to him and that
is the psychological moment for the decided action of the buyers.

Reduced as to number, well informed about the business and in the
possession of daily and direct notices from the consuming markets,
perfectly bound up to them by a question of mutual interest, they decide
to make the price for the merchandise that is offered to them. It is not
always that that price corresponds in reality to those of the foreign
market, but the apprehension that seizes the merchant-trader that moved
by their interests the buyers may resolve to retire the offer, does not
permit him either to hesitate or resist. He hands over the merchandise
with a small profit and not uncommonly with a loss.

Treating of an article which up till to-day has been produced in a
quantity inferior to the necessity of the industry, whose price was kept
up high, much above that which might be called a remunerative price, that
inversion of the law of economics is a very curious one, because, in this
case, it is not the producer who imposes the price, but the buyer who
does so.

The difficulties which the merchant-trader had to fight against, have
been increased lately with the advent of the “regatões,” a species of
barter-commission travelers on the rivers. This trade is exercised by
individuals acting for their own account or as agents of the merchants
and who go up the rivers with merchandise, doing business at sight in
exchange for money or rubber, diverting in this way a large part of
the transactions until now exercised through the inter-medium of the
merchant-traders.

The principal causes of the precarious position of the “aviadores” or
merchant-traders are the lack of adequate capital and the want of banking
facilities and other establishments of credit which might come to their
aid.

The export houses, however, operate with the greatest firmness. They
discount the drafts for the rubber bought, in the agencies of the English
banks, and with the product of this operation pay the merchant-traders,
and as these drafts are at 90 days sight, it is only after the rubber is
sold in New York or in Liverpool that they satisfy their indebtedness,
thus trafficking almost covered from any risk whatsoever.

       *       *       *       *       *

The aviador or merchant-trader receives the rubber by the weight which
it shows at the moment of being unloaded; if the trip is a long one the
shortage in weight of the rubber may be as much as 15 per cent; if,
on the other hand, there has been no time, owing to the shortness of
the trip, for such a thing to happen, it is certain that on its being
magazined or stored-up, it will continue to =quebrar=, i.e., diminish in
weight. Thus, therefore, it is to the interest of all parties concerned
to sell it and export it as soon after its arrival as possible, which,
however, does not mean to say that the question of shortage is not an
element which comes into play in making the estimate of its value.

The classifying of the rubber is done upon the occasion of its sale, this
being an operation which necessitates a long experience and practice in
the knowledge of the article.

Two workmen with iron instruments which they call “gatos,” take hold of
the skin (smoke-cured roll or ball) by the orifice which is left in its
shape on its being made, at the same time that a third workman cuts it
down the middle with a sharp instrument called a “traçado.” By this means
it is easy to ascertain if the manufacture of the internal coatings or
layers has been done with the necessary care, and if the weight has been
affected by water, or by any other extraneous body.

If the rubber presents itself with an uniform aspect, perfectly smoked
and sufficiently elastic, it is classed “fina.” If, however, any points
present spongy parts proceeding from coagulation of the latex anterior to
the smoking process, it is styled “entre-fina.” To the agglomeration of
residue which congeals freely, the name of “sernamby” is given.

There is still the “borracha fraca” little elastic, whose mercantile
value is put in the same category as “sernamby” and which does not come
from the latex of the hevea.

This work being finished, the rubber is bought in accordance with the
quotations of the day, based upon prices coming from England and from the
United States, but as has already been explained, this quotation is not
always respected.

There is another anomaly to which it is advisable to refer: whilst the
“entre-fina” and the sernamby are quoted abroad at least at 200 réis and
1$800 réis less than the “fina” the markets of Belém and Manáos show a
difference of 800 réis and 2$000.

There are other abuses which also take place in the classifying of the
rubber, which gives as a result that the buyers prefer to do business
upon inferior qualities, because these offer a larger margin for profits.

The rubber is exported in American pineboxes which can hold nearly 150
Kilos. The dearness of manual labor in the Amazon territory makes it
difficult to take advantage of the innumerable species of timber-woods in
which the valley of the great river is so abundantly rich.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the remaining markets of the country where the rubber is negotiated,
the price is regulated by the quotations in Pará. These local markets are
of little importance and in nothing do they distinguish themselves as to
the relative transactions in rubber, from the general mass of business.
The class of =aviadores= or merchant-trader does not exist. Each producer
sends his stock to his agent or representative or sells it to the first
buyer. The rubber is collected from either maniçoba or mangabeira.

In the commerce of those products, the markets of Bahia and Fortaleza
stand out the most prominently, to which places a certain appreciable
portion of cultivated plantation rubber converges every year besides a
great quantity of native rubber.




ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL IMPORTANCE—FEDERAL AND STATE REVENUE—EXPORTATION
TAX


The most superficial examination of the actual economic position of
Brazil demonstrates at once and in an incisive manner how important the
rubber industry is to the national life of the country.

Possessor of the innumerable riches distributed by the three Kingdoms of
Nature, it is almost exclusively due to the cultivation of coffee and to
the extraction of rubber that Brazil owes its extraordinary commercial
development in these last twenty years.

The great fortunes which the plantations of the famous red-bean of the
coffee-tree created in the South and the considerable profits which
the exploitation of the precious gum have produced in the North, were
certainly the causes which most influenced the development of the
production to such an extraordinary degree, relegating to a much lower
schedule in the general tabular statement of Brazilian exportation, all
the products, whose commerce although certainly remunerative, does not
show such certain and speedy results.

The general exportation of Brazilian merchandise was £63,724,440 in 1909,
£63,091,547 in 1910 and £66,838,982 in 1911. To these totals, coffee
and rubber contributed during each of the same three years £52,401,276,
£51,342,278 and £55,458,221 respectively—totals these, sufficient by
themselves, to guarantee with advantage the Brazilian international
commercial equilibrium, when it is seen that in those said same years,
the general importation of merchandise amounted to £37,139,354,
£47,871,974 and £52,798,016.

Rubber contributed to the general total of exportation with 29.70 per
cent in 1909, 39.06 per cent in 1910 and 22.53 per cent in 1911, or in
other words an average of 30.43 per cent per annum. It is worthy of
note, that the great difference which took place in the above-mentioned
percentages is explained in the fluctuations in the prices of rubber,
since the production not only did not decrease, but, as a matter of fact,
increased from year to year. Therefore it is seen that nearly one-third
of Brazil’s export trade is supplied by rubber, and it is nearly twenty
millions of pounds sterling that Brazil receives every year, and which
goes far to provide for the sustentation, not only of the population of
the Brazilian Northwest, comprised in the great States of Pará, Amazons
and Matto-Grosso and the Federal Territory of the Acre, but for the
prosperity of the North-east States, which get the benefit of a good
part of that sum through the intermedium of their sons, who live by the
exploitation of the rubber; the Southern States benefit in their turn
by the abundance of money in the North, that most secure guarantee of
their prosperity, since that being producers of cereals, xarque, coffee,
sugar, textile goods, hats and shoes, for a long time already they have
constituted themselves the principal furnishers of food-stuffs and
wearing apparel to that region. Finally there is still to be considered
the benefit to be brought indirectly to the whole country because that
sum goes to increase the commerce of importation, thus powerfully
augmenting the Federal Customs Revenue.

The sum obtained by the States of the Amazons and Pará and by the Federal
Territory of the Acre, is also considerable every year by the tribute
paid on the rubber going out.

This last Territory of the Acre, since its incorporation with Brazil by
the Treaty of Petropolis concluded with Bolivia in 1903, cost the Union
(including the expenses incident to the acquisition of the Territory and
other resulting compromises of the said treaty, such as the arbitral
Tribunal, loans to Bolivia, marking out of the frontier, construction of
the Madeira-Mamoré Railroad and expenses for the mobilization of troops,
etc.), up till 1909 the sum of Rs. 62,595:562$038; the revenue brought in
during the same period attained the sum of Rs. 58,052:757$012, in 1910
moreover the tax upon the rubber produced was Rs. 19,867:529$159 and in
1911 Rs. 9,671:711$068, or in other words Rs. 29,539:240$227 more, which
should be carried to the credit of that very rich region. The rubber of
the Acre is exported through the intermedium of the markets of Belém and
Manáos, the impost-tax of 20 per cent ad valorem being collected on the
occasion of its shipment.

The States of Amazonas and Pará cannot dispense quickly without very
serious economic disturbance with the revenue receivable from the
tribute paid on the exportation of rubber. As a matter of fact, the
State of Amazonas collected the sum of Rs. 16,845:585$063 in 1909, Rs.
18,069:162$372 in 1910 and Rs. 12,901:477$379 in 1911; the impost-tax
upon rubber brought in those same years respectively Rs. 13,316:487$569,
Rs. 14,836:235$238 and Rs. 9,999:031$526, which can also be reckoned by
79.04 per cent, 82.11 per cent and 77.50 per cent.

The State of Amazonas taxes rubber produced in the State itself, in 18
per cent ad valorem, and that coming from the Javary, the boundary river
with Perú, in 7 per cent.

In its turn Pará has had in the form of revenue collected in those
years, the amounts of Rs. 19,039:709$531, Rs. 20,255:070$604 and Rs.
14,480:716$176, the import-tax on rubber rendering Rs. 14,602:759$269,
Rs. 14,701:894$955 and Rs. 9,518:716$267, or 76.69 per cent, 72.58 per
cent and 65.73 per cent.

The taxes charged by Pará are 22 per cent ad valorem for Rubber “fina,”
“entre-fina” and “sernamby,” and 15 per cent for whatever other kind.
Besides those there is an additional tax of 2.5 per cent in benefit of
the Santa Casa de Misericordia charged on the exportation taxes.

These figures seem to show the importance for those States of questions
concerning the production and consumption of the world’s rubber, and with
greater reason still for Brazil as a whole. The ruin of one of the most
promising regions on the face of the globe, the profound depreciation
of Brazilian finances and the dreaded commercial crisis with which the
country would have to fight, would be the disastrous effect of the
indifference of the Federal and States Governments on such a matter.
But that, however, is not the attitude of those Governments; they are
decreeing various measures now in course of being carried out and which
after minute studies were judged necessary, so that Brazil might continue
to maintain her proud position of importance for the precious “black
gold” (rubber) in the world’s market.




RUBBER-CONSUMING MARKETS—COMPETITION OF OTHER RUBBER-PRODUCING COUNTRIES


New York, Liverpool, London, Hamburg, Antwerp and Havre are at the
present time, by their order of importance, the principal world’s markets
for rubber.

New York, by virtue of the extraordinary development of North American
industries, which in a steadily increasing scale, are consuming
constantly greater quantities of raw material, receives almost half of
the rubber produced in all the world. Nearly 60 per cent of the rubber
negotiated in New York is Brazilian. After this follow Central America
and Mexico; but as rubber proceeding from all parts appears in the New
York market it is evident that there is no specialty in this business.

Liverpool, perhaps due to the fact of its being the port to which the
lines of navigation that run to and from the Amazon are directed, has
become the European emporium for Brazilian rubber. In fact, 40 per cent
of the Brazilian production is directed towards that city. Liverpool
also receives rubber of various qualities proceeding from the English and
other European possessions in equatorial Africa.

The increasing production of the Oriental plantations finds in London one
of its principal markets for the precious gum. Although rubber proceeding
from different parts appears in the market, it may be affirmed without
hesitation, that London is the special centre for cultivated refined
rubber (plantation) which is easily explained by the fact that the owners
of the extensive plantations in the Malay States are nearly all of them
London companies.

Occidental and Oriental Africa, principally German Colonies, send to
Hamburg the greater part of the rubber which is negotiated on that
market. Brazil enters with about 20 per cent of the total amount of the
business.

Antwerp owes its rubber trade to the creation of the Congo Free State,
whose production, now in decline, is practically all directed to this
city. It also receives rubber from Brazil, and seeing that Belgian
capital is employed in the Oriental plantations its future is promising.

Havre, on the other hand, is of greater importance to Brazil; where 75
per cent of the transactions are in Brazilian rubber. It also imports the
Congo species, as also those of some of the French Colonies in Africa.
However, the great bulk of the production of these latter colonies is
directed to Bordeaux.

       *       *       *       *       *

The methods of sale adopted in these markets, vary very much. From the
slow old-fashioned process of sale by private treaty, to sales on time
terms, passing through auctions and underwritings, in short all the
commonly known modes of negotiating are in use.

The most important market, that of New York, adheres to the old-fashioned
method of personal contracts for immediate delivery, which certainly
serves better the interests of buyers, than those of sellers; the
agitation that was created round this question with a view to reform the
market, gave no result whatsoever.

Liverpool presents us the polymorphic type. Private sales, and sales on a
fixed day for delivery, or sales by auctions, all take place, consulting
thereby the preferences of both sellers and buyers, and establishing the
free course of the values. The same happens in London, where, however,
the Plantation companies have initiated more advanced transactions, such
as sales of crops in anticipation.

Hamburg and Antwerp also practice sales by auction and on delivery.
However, in this latter the method of underwriting is that most in vogue
and which among all the processes is the one that consults most the
interest of the seller. This is carried out in the following manner: A
broker advertises a certain quantity of rubber for sale, the particulars
of which he supplies (name of seller, weight, quality, estimated price,
etc.), about twenty days beforehand. On the day appointed, he receives
the offers of purchase closed and sealed; these are then opened in a
public place and the prices are inscribed on a schedule divided into
columns, each one headed with the name of the house offering. Once this
operation has finished, the rubber falls to the highest bidder. The
seller has, however, the right to withdraw the goods in case the price
that results does not satisfy him.

The Antwerp market adopted this system with the view to competing against
cognate markets. As the reducing of the expenses on the product, which
corresponded to frs. 2.60 per 100 Kilos, the same being frs. 4.93 and
frs. 7.30 in Hamburg and Liverpool respectively, did not suffice, it
endeavored to attract the seller by offering the most advantageous
prices, and it seems that it has succeeded in its desideratum.

Havre followed its example and it is greatly to be desired that all the
rubber markets adopt the same system, not only for the reasons set forth,
but also because it is a safe precaution against the manipulations of
speculators.

Brazil has always maintained its predominating position in the world’s
market for rubber, not only as the greatest producer, but also as the
producer of the best quality.

In 1827, the first year about which statistical data exist, Brazil
exported 31 tons of rubber; in 1837, 289 tons, or say an increase of 932
per cent; in 1847, 624 tons, or 216 per cent more; in 1857, 1,800 tons,
which corresponds to an increase of 290 per cent; in 1867, 5,826 tons,
or 322 per cent more; 1877, 9,215 tons, thus augmenting by 158 per cent;
in 1887, 13,290 tons, or 144 per cent increase; in 1897, 21,256 tons,
representing about 160 per cent more; and, finally, in 1907, 36,490 tons,
or approximately an increase of 172 per cent.

Within the last decade, that is to say, from 1902 to 1911 (vide
statistical statements =in fine=), the exportation rose gradually to
28,631 tons in 1902 and to 39,026 tons in 1909, the maximum ever reached
so far, to descend immediately to 38,546 tons in 1910 and 36,547 tons in
1911.

Brazil has so far not had any serious competition to fear. It is true
that the other producing countries in Central America, South Africa and
Asia, send a considerable quantity of rubber on to the market, but this
does not affect the Brazilian trade, because, besides being practically
all of it of an inferior quality, such extra supply is not sufficient
to occasion the harmful effects of an overproduction. It is curious
to observe, that even within the last decade, the production of those
regions which in 1901 was 21,547 tons increased even so far as to surpass
the production of Brazil in the year of 1905, reaching then 35,428 tons;
but it diminished as rapidly as it had increased and in 1911 we see it
reduced to 23,747 tons. This decrease cannot be attributed to the effects
of competition, for instance to the plantations of the Orient, whose
production commenced to accentuate itself exactly in the year of 1905
and henceforward. As a matter of fact, competition should bring forth a
fall in prices, but however, on the contrary, such did not happen, the
quotations reaching in the years of 1909 and 1910 such extremes as had
never been seen in the rubber market. It will be sufficient to point out,
that the refined rubber of Pará, which is the Standard regulating type
of the market and whose average annual price has been 3, 4 and even 5
shillings, went up in those years to 12s/6 per pound.

However, a new competitor did appear, which had to be taken into
consideration, and which induced the Government of Brazil to adopt some
measures tending to protect its great article of export. The considerable
and methodical plantations of the =hevea brasiliensis= made in the
peninsula of Malacca in Malasia and on the island of Ceylon, commenced to
produce rubber, which it was predicted would within a few years, due to
the enormous quantity produced at a low figure, get the mastery of the
market.

These plantations, the initial experiments of which date from the year of
1876, with 70,000 seeds sent from the Tapajóz river, an affluent of the
Amazon, by Wickham to the Royal Botanical Garden of Kew, have taken an
enormous increment since the year 1896, till to-day, due to the results
obtained which indicated beyond possible doubt the advantages of the
cultivation of hevea, this in view of the constantly increasing price
of the product and the new applications which day after day the rubber
industry has opened up.

The cultivated-plantation rubber, which appeared on the market with 5
tons in 1901, was represented by 646 tons five years later and at the end
of another equal period, by 12,000 tons. It is estimated that if nothing
unforeseen happens to the contrary, its production in 1916 will be 70,000
tons, thus reaching the quantity which is at the present moment consumed
each year by the necessities of the industry.

It is believed that by that time the inferior qualities furnished
by Africa, Central America and even by Brazil, will gradually have
disappeared from the market. In order to meet the consumption which, if
progression that hitherto has taken place, continues, will then be of
98,603 tons, the production of Brazil and of the Orient together will
surely render a quantity much superior to that demand.

The average cost per Kilo of fine Pará rubber in the valley of the Amazon
is from 3$000 to 3$500; in India of 2$650; however, this difference
should disappear under the operation of the Rubber Defence Act, which
is inserted further on, and the possible augmentation of the price in
the Orient, where manual labor will become dearer later on when all its
plantations are in full exploitation, and by the consequent scarcity of
labor, against which agriculturists are already commencing to struggle.

The industrial element still continues to give preference to the
Brazilian rubber, this being better in quality, =nerve= and in
elasticity—properties these which may probably be attributed to the
process of curing, which is not employed in the Orient, or possibly to
the meteorologic and climate conditions, the geological composition
of the soil, etc. It is true that the quotation for planted rubber
has been superior to that of wild rubber, but it is advisable not to
forget, that while the former shrinks only 3 per cent, and has a much
better appearance, the latter loses 18 per cent of its weight. The price
difference is thus amply explained and when accounts are made up it is
still the fine quality from Pará that is the better quoted.




THE INDIA RUBBER PROBLEM—MEANS SUGGESTED AND RESOLVED BY THE STATES


Threatened with losing the predominant position it has always occupied in
the rubber market of the world, Brazil could not, without committing an
economical suicide, remain inactive.

The time having come when native rubber would enter into competition with
planted rubber, Brazil had to defend its interests by becoming equipped
for the struggle, making the cost of its product cheaper in order to
ensure its occupying an advantageous position in the market.

Many are the causes which at present contribute to the high cost of
Brazilian rubber, but they may be united into three groups, as follows:
1st, expensive labour; 2nd, heavy transport tariffs; and 3rd, excessive
export taxes.

The expensive labour is due to the scantiness of population in the Amazon
valley, the want of foreign immigration to compensate it, and the high
cost of food supplies.

The rubber-producing trees (seringaes) of the Amazon are exploited
by the natives, whose number is but small, and by the immigrants from
the eastern States who, fleeing from the droughts which periodically
befall those States and attracted by the liberal profits offered by the
extraction of rubber, go there in thousands every year. This current of
immigration is, however, insufficient; a proper remedy for such a state
of things would perhaps be foreign labour which still keeps back from the
North because it only knows it through garbled information. The bad food
and the indifference for all that concerns health conditions, contribute
every year to the invaliding of a considerable number of men.

The extraction of India rubber being the occupation which pays best in
the Amazon Valley, the pastoral industry, cattle-breeding and farming are
altogether despised, so that all the articles of subsistence needed by
the population, either come from the South of Brazil, burdened by cost of
a long transport, or from abroad overloaded with high Brazilian Customs
duties.

The heavy transport tariffs are due to the numerous difficulties of all
sorts that thwart navigation in the affluents and sub-affluents of the
Amazon river and to the greediness of ship-owners, encouraged by the
absence of competition. On the other hand, the existence of a complete
river system has made the Brazilian Governments disregard the necessity
of establishing railways which, by shortening distances, might bind the
different affluents of the great river to each other.

Finally, the excessive taxation imposed by the States of Amazonas and
Pará on its almost only product of exportation is a consequence of the
special conditions of life in that Brazilian region, which conditions we
have just described. The Governmental and administrative system requires
large sums for its maintenance, is unable to avail itself of any other
sources of income because they hardly exist. The legislator has had to go
on taxing the great product more and more.

In order to cheapen the product, besides removing the causes which have
just been shown, two other far-reaching measures have been suggested; the
adoption of a process for coagulation of the latex which might decrease
the production of inferior rubbers, and planting on a big scale.

At the present moment the exportation of rubber from the Amazon is
composed of 50 per cent of rubber “fina,” 10 per cent of “entre-fina,”
25 per cent of “sernamby,” and 15 per cent of “caucho.” Now, any process
that can do away with or might at least diminish the percentage of
entrefina and sernamby would be a means of cheapening the rubber of finer
quality (fina). To apply the same activity to produce 70 or 75 Kilos of
“fina” instead of 50 fina, 10 entrefina and 15 sernamby, is the same
in reality as obtaining the first quality at a very much lower price.
Such is the desideratum of the process of Dr. Carlos de Cerqueira Pinto,
a Brazilian doctor who has lived for a great number of years among the
rubber districts where he has made a most accurate study of the subject.
The results hitherto attained are very satisfactory, the Government of
Brazil having aided the inventor with a view to spreading his invention
once its advantages have been definitely proven.

At the same time, the process of extracting the rubber from trees
disseminated in the interior of the forests at a considerable distance
one tree from the other, is against all principles of economy. The
planting on a large scale, on the margin of the Amazon river, or of its
big affluents, but in places of easy access, is an essential measure,
especially seeing that the Government aims at maintaining for Brazil in
future, the prominent position it now occupies in the trade. Therefore,
whilst considering all the complex elements of the question thoroughly,
a study had to be made of all the solutions presented. We shall now see
what procedure was followed:

In August, 1909, a Congress of seringueiros (rubber gatherers), assembled
in Acre with a view to studying and discussing the situation of the
rubber trade. In a message addressed to the President of the Republic at
the closing of the proceedings, the members of the Congress suggested, as
chief measures, easy communications, roads, railway lines, subventioned
lines of steamers, colonization promoted by the Government and a
reduction in the export duty.

Later on, in the same year, the Pará Government enacted Laws Nos. 1,100
and 1,109 of the 5th and 6th of November, both of which have great
bearing on the solution of this most important problem.

The first of said laws gives authority, in article 1st, to the State
Government, to enter into agreements with one or more native or
foreign companies, in regard to the plantation and exploitation of the
seringueira (hevea brasiliensis) against the concession of the following
favors:

a. The concession of vacant lands up to twenty thousand hectares with
proper demarkations for the Company’s plantings.

b. Reduction in the export duty of planted rubber to the extent of 50 per
cent in the first 10 years as from the date of the first exportation;
of 40 per cent in the second decade; of 30 per cent thenceforward until
completion of twenty years.

c. Reduction of 30 per cent in the tariffs of the Bragança railway and in
the freights of the line of steamers subventioned by the State, during a
term of twenty years, for planted rubber produced by the Company.

d. Transport free of charge by the Bragança railway and steamers under
the States’ subsidy of all machinery and plant belonging to the Company
and intended for the installation of its establishments; and of whatever
colonists the Company may place in its premises as well as of seeds,
manure plants and cattle.

e. An advance, by way of guaranteed interest, of 5 per cent per annum on
the capital issued by the company holding the concession to the extent of
one-half of the paid up capital.

Special paragraph.—This guarantee, whatsoever be the Company’s capital,
shall not be paid on a sum exceeding £400,000 Sterling over and above
£800,000 Sterling, or its equivalent in paper money.

The advances, by way of guaranteed interest, thus conceded, will be
discontinued once the Company’s profits attain 6 per cent, and on
exceeding 7 per cent the Company will start amortizing the sums loaned by
the State to the extent of 5 per cent on the total sum advanced.

The concession of lands available will be made by way of emphyteusis for
99 years.

The Statutes will have to be approved by the Government, who will name
one of the Company’s Directors and retain certain rights with a view to
the due enforcement of the contract.

Article Second of the Law describes the Company’s obligations, which are
as follows:

First. To plant at least twenty thousand rubber trees per year.

Second. To carry out instructions from the Agriculture Department of the
State in the planting.

Third. To maintain a rural elementary school, with accommodation for the
shelter of at least twenty destitute children, and a field of practical
tuition of mechanical agriculture, experimental cultivation of tropical
plants, experiments in manure, etc.

Fourth. Accessory planting of rice, maize, haricot beans, etc., improving
the quality of same by mechanical means.

Fifth. Furnish accurate yearly statistics of the number of plantations
made, their state and the general production of rubber and other articles.

Sixth. Use on the bags, boxes and other receptacles containing the
goods produced, a trade-mark duly registered at the Board of Trade as
prescribed by law.

Seventh. Allow the Government to control all the work carried out by the
Company in such manner as the Government may think fit.

Complementary to the former, the Law of November 6th concedes prizes and
other favors to the agriculturists of the State, who, by themselves or
associations formed by them, should fulfil the conditions set forth in
same.

The prizes are of five hundred mil réis for each plot of five hundred
rubber trees properly planted; the favors consist of the distribution
free of charge of chemical manure, seeds, plants, instructions and
agricultural monographs, gratuitous tuition to all the laborer-planters,
transport free by the Bragança Railway and steamers subsidized by the
State, reduction of export duties, =etc.=

Lastly, Law No. 1,115, of the 8th November, 1909, affords protection to
the rubber trees that are actually yielding, with a view to improving
their production.

Article First authorizes the Government of the State to further the
defence of the rubber industry as regards the latex and preparation of
rubber, in order to prevent the destruction of the trees existing in the
State, punishment being dealt to whomsoever manufactures the product by
subversive means.

Article second provides a prize of 50 contos of réis paper money at
most, to be awarded at the Government’s discretion, to the discoverer or
inventor of some process of manufacturing or preparing rubber, which may
afford undeniable advantages as regards its manufacture and reduces the
inferior classes to a single standard of rubber “fina,” ensuring a high
price for the article.

The State of Amazonas also, as per Law No. 675 of May 20, 1911,
authorizes the Executive Power to concede any advisable favors to
individuals or undertakings that may bind themselves to put up in Manáos
factories for refinement of rubber by means of new and improved methods,
so as to obtain a standard class of rubber for exportation.

The Commercial, Industrial and Agricultural Congress held at Manáos
in February, 1910, resolved in its final conclusions to recommend to
the Brazilian Government and the immediate neighboring Republics, the
reforming of their freights, especially as regards the food supplies;
grant favors to navigation; free rivers from obstructions; construct
railways; create colonial centres; admit of the pressing and absolute
necessity to plant rubber trees in the Amazon valley and open new fields
of plantation; suggests the establishment of permanent exhibitions of a
highly educational character; advises the rubber extractors not to give
up the process of curing by smoke and condemns entirely the use of acids
or alum in the coagulation, and calls attention to the question of the
commercial classes of rubber which should be properly defined. Going into
details it requests numerous favors for the agriculturists that may go
in for planting hevea rubber trees, cacao and cereals, cotton and other
products, and that prizes be granted to cattle breeders, experimental
fields be opened, as also laboratories of analysis and a service be
established for dealing with the yellow fever and paludinous fevers, etc.

Such an important matter could not be solved by half-measures; it was
necessary and even indispensable to adopt a plan embracing all the
solutions suggested and proclaimed as being elements of success, thus
obtaining a united plan entailing some complexity in its execution, it is
true, yet clear and simple in its combined purposes.

And this desideratum was achieved by the Federal Law No. 2,543 A of the
fifth of January, 1912.




MEASURES ADOPTED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT—RIO DE JANEIRO CONGRESS OF
RUBBER—REGULATIONS OF THE NEW RUBBER DEFENSE ACT


For a long time back the attention of the Brazilian Government has been
drawn to the necessity of adopting a plan of defence for India rubber,
which might solve in a practical and decisive manner the so-long-debated
“problem of the North.”

In August, 1911, the Minister of Agriculture, after a close study,
made with the aid of specialists and persons having full knowledge of
that region of the country, drew up a project in the above sense and,
recognizing the necessity of still hearing those who are most directly
interested in the matter, convened a meeting of representatives of the
State Governments, Commercial Associations and other Institutions which
might lead to a perfect understanding of what was most advisable to do.

The first meeting was held on August 14, and the Government’s plan
was hailed with great applause, the same being approved, with slight
alterations, in the last session which took place on the twenty-second of
the same month.

By Message of September 14, 1911, Marshal Hermes da Fonseca, President of
the Republic, sent to the National Congress for approval, the plan duly
elaborated; after being carefully studied by Congress it was approved and
converted into Law, under No. 2,543 A and was sanctioned on January 5,
1912.

On April 17, 1912, Decree No. 9,521 was enacted with the Regulation for
carrying out the measures and services provided for in the law of January.

The measures and services prescribed by Law No. 2,543 A of January,
1912, for the economic defence of rubber, regulated by Decree No. 9,521
of April 17, 1912, are as follows:

I. To encourage the rubber extractor and the cultivator of the principal
rubber-producing trees.

II. To form industries for the refinement and manufacture of rubber
articles.

III. To aid immigrants, both from the country and those who have recently
arrived from abroad, and the workmen already established in the Amazon
valley.

IV. To render transport easy and decrease the cost in the Amazon valley.

V. To install productive centres of food supplies in the Amazon valley.

VI. To hold three-yearly exhibitions in Rio de Janeiro, comprehending all
that relates to the rubber industry of the country.

The measures contained in the law in regard to making agreements with
the States which produce rubber “seringa,” with a view to decreasing
the export duties and protecting the rubber trade, will be dealt
with separately, and with regard to the definition and legalization
of freeholds in the Federal Territory in Acre and the revision and
consolidation of regulations concerning the coasting service of steamers
(included in No. IV) special By-Laws will be drawn up which shall be
published in due course.

       *       *       *       *       *

The measures in reference to the first group and whose object is to
encourage the extracting industry and plantation of the principal rubber
producing trees are: First, reduction of the cost of tools and materials
employed in the rubber trade; second, granting of prizes in money to
the planters of the principal rubber trees; third, installation of
experimental stations for the cultivation of rubber.

For the reduction in the cost of utensils and materials, free entrance is
granted with exemption from any import duties, as well as to everything
intended for the cultivation of the seringueira, caucho, maniçoba and
mangabeira and the gathering-in and improving of rubber extracted from
those trees; whether as regards the extracting industry or the plantation
work.

These pecuniary premiums for encouraging the industry, will be conceded
to all those who plant entirely anew, or who devote themselves to
replanting; in the first case and for every group of 12 hectares, the
premiums will be Rs. 2:500$000 when the planting is of “seringueira”;
Rs. 1:500$000 when it treats of “caucho” or “maniçoba”; and 900$000 when
it is mangabeira; in the second case and for every group of 25 hectares
the premiums will be 2:000$000, 1:000$000 and 720$000 respectively. The
minimum number of trees for the new plantations will be 250 per hectare
for the seringueira and caucho, and 400 for the maniçoba and mangabeira;
in the case of re-planting, the distance to keep between the trees should
be from 6 metres to 6m50 for the first mentioned case and 5 metres
for the second. In order to obtain the payment of the premium, it is
requisite that the trees be well cared for, and that not more than 15 per
cent are damaged or useless.

The subsidiary cultivation of alimentitious plants or of those useful for
industrial purposes, will secure an annual gratuity corresponding to 5
per cent of the value of the principal premium.

For the cultivation of the seringueira, experimental stations will be
localized in the Territory of the Acre, and in the States of Matto
Grosso, Amazonas, Pará, Maranhão, Piauhy and Bahia and for the growing
of the maniçoba conjointly with that of the mangabeira in the States of
Piauhy, Ceará, Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Geraes, S. Paulo, Goyaz, Paraná
and Matto Grosso.

Each station will have an area of from 80 to 100 hectares, the land
selected having to be suited to the climatic and agrological conditions
exacted by the nature or quality of the plant to be cultivated.

Besides the grounds for experimental cultivation, each station will
possess laboratories of vegetable physiology for the testing of seeds
and phytopathology, of agricultural entomology; of agricultural
vegetable chemistry and bromotology and of microbiology and technology;
an agricultural and woodlands museum; a gallery of machines and a
meteorological post. Thus it will be properly equipped in order to
serve those who may consult it upon any matter whatsoever, within the
scope of its competency, carry out the analysis of manures and other
chemical fertilizers, plants and waters, distribute plants and selected
seeds, study the diseases common to growing plants and the means of
combatting them, making commonly known by means of the publication of
an official bulletin which will be distributed gratuitously to all
interested parties, the results obtained relative to the most practical
and economical means of carrying out the cultivation of rubber, the best
means of bettering its condition, its preservation, the packing of the
products, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

In order to stimulate the creation in Brazil of the industries for
refining and manufacturing all kinds of articles made of rubber, monetary
premiums will be instituted as well as exemption from taxes, the right
of disappropriation for private individuals, that may be necessary
for the installation and mounting of factories and the preference of
the Government will be granted for such articles, which each factory
produces, when supplies are made to the army and to the navy, as well as
to other public departments.

The premiums will be as high as 400:000$000 for the first factory for the
refining of seringa rubber that may be established in each of the cities
of Belém and Manáos; up to 100:000$000 for the first rubber-refining
factory of “maniçoba” and of mangabeira, which may be installed in each
one of the States of Piauhy, Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte, Pernambuco,
Bahia, Minas Geraes and São Paulo; and finally of 500:000$000 for the
first factory of rubber-made articles, which is inaugurated in Manáos,
Belém, Recife, Bahia and Rio de Janeiro.

The exemption from import duties embraces the rights of importation
for the materials, machinery, utensils and the necessary tools for the
construction and mounting of the factory and the chemical substances,
textile articles and divers materials, combustibles and lubricants
indispensable for the up-keep and working of the factory during the
time-term of 25 years; and immunity from the State and Municipal taxes
for the time term of the contract by reason of the factory being
considered a Federal Service.

The premium in cash shall only be considered when the capital of the
factory is equivalent to 4 times its value. The payment of such premium
will be effected immediately after the inauguration of the factory.

The problem of assisting immigrants both national and foreign, who may
have just arrived and the laborers established in the valley of the
Amazon, is met by the installation of emigrant-hotels in Belém, in Manáos
and in the Territory of the Acre, by the construction of hospitals in the
Interior and by the creation of agricultural colonies adjacent to such
hospitals.

The hotels for the reception of immigrants shall follow the rule and be
guided in their installation by that of the Ilha das Flores in Rio de
Janeiro, that latter being considered a Model Institution, at the same
time the modifications exacted by the conditions of each particular case,
that of Belém having sufficient capacity to accommodate 1,500 immigrants;
that of Manáos 1,200 and that of Acre 800. Close to each of these
immigrant-quarters, a store-house will be erected which shall contain
all kinds of special tools and utensils employed in the India rubber
industry, the which will be sold to the immigrants, who desire to buy
them at strictly cost price.

The families of both national and foreign immigrants who do not
expressly declare that they prefer another destination will be sent to
the National Fazendas (ranches) of the Rio Branco, where they will be
located and distributed among the different colonial centres in the
different colonies.

The hospitals in the Interior are created with a view of providing the
inhabitants of the Amazon valley with a centre to which they may have
recourse and where they may be treated, acquire medicine and protect
themselves against contagious diseases. The points selected for these are
Boa Vista of the Rio Branco, S. Gabriel on the Rio Negro, Teffé or Fonte
Boa on the river Solimões, São Felippe on the river Juruá, Bocca do Acre
on the Rio Purús, at the confluence of the river Arinos with the Juruéna,
in the Alto Tapajóz, Conceição of the river Araguaya, and Montenegro on
the Amapá.

Each hospital will have accommodation for 100 sick people and will be
divided into 5 pavillions, one of these latter being constructed with
all the requisites necessary for the isolation of infectious diseases;
there will also be a disinfecting house, a laboratory for chemical and
microbiologic diagnosis, rooms for surgical operations and for autopsies,
consulting rooms and pharmacy.

There will also be a service of propaganda of the habits and hygienic
measures necessary for the laborers who work and live in the Amazonian
valley.

Adjoining each hospital, agricultural centres will be founded wherein to
localize 100 families at the least, these agricultural centres will have
for their object the production of the alimenticiary products necessary
for the supply of the said hospitals, the cultivation and extensive
breeding of the plants and animals consumed as food by the neighboring
population located all around, and the constitution of fixed centres of
population which shall help towards the increased peopling of the region.
The Government will assist the emigrants in the acquiring of lands and
shall furnish them with food stuffs at a low price and their maintenance
during the initial period.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amongst the improvements and means tending to facilitate transport and
diminish its cost in the valley of the Amazon, the construction of
systems of railways and the betterment of the navigability of the rivers
most peopled, is of great importance.

The network of iron roads will be of two different categories: systems
of great lines forming an integral part of the general Federal system of
railroads and a network of economic narrow-gauged railways having the
character simply of penetration lines.

Belonging to the first of these categories the following networks will
be commenced at once, and constructed within the shortest space of time
possible: 1º starting from Belém de Pará and joining onto the general
railway system in Pirapóra, Minas Geraes and in Coroatá, in Maranhão,
with the necessary branches to connect the initial or terminal point of
navigation on the rivers Araguaya, Tocantins, Parahyba and S. Francisco;
2º starting point from the Madeira e Mamoré Railway in the proximity of
the mouth of the Abunã, passing by the town of Rio Branco and by the most
appropriate point between Senna Madueira and Catay and terminating in the
town of Thaumaturgo, with branch line right up to the frontier of Perú,
along the valley of the river Purús.

The construction and renting out of these railways will be done in
competition by Public Tender.

The concession for the railways of the second category shall only be made
to those who undertake to colonize and exploit in proportion as that may
be justified, the respective marginal lands, i.e., the land lying along
each side of such said lines. The Government will concede a subsidy of
25:000$000 per kilometre constructed; the technical conditions are: a
line of the Decauville portatil, the weight of the rails being 50 kilos
per metre, with a gauge of 0.60 between the rails and the minimum radius
of the curve 40 meters inclination 0.10 and weight of the locomotives in
full working order, 18 to 20 tons.

By way of experiment the Governments will bring about at once, the
construction of 2 economic railway systems, 1º starting from Antiga
Sauzel on the left bank of the river Xingú and going up the valley as
far as the river Careahy, with a branch leading to the river Tapajóz,
whose valley it will follow until the river S. Manoel and with other
sub-branches; 2º starting from the confluent of the Rio Negro with the
Rio Branco and following the valleys of Seruiny and the Caratimani
passing over the water-shed and going on until it terminates in the Alto
Uraricoera, with 2 branches, the one for the Alto Paduary and the other
for the town of Boa Vista.

The necessary improvements to be made towards effecting the navigability
of the rivers at all seasons of the year, by steamers drawing up to 3
feet of water, of the Rio Negro, between S. Isabel and Cucuhy, on the Rio
Branco from its mouth as far as S. Joaquim; of the river Purús between
Hiutanahã and Senna Madureira, and of the river Acre from its mouth as
far as Riosinho de Pedras, will be contracted for by public-tender or by
some public company which can prove itself sufficiently capable for the
carrying out of the same. The maximum time-term for the termination of
the improvements will be 7 years.

As supplementary measures, the exemption from taxes is conceded to the
floating material of whatever kind destined to fluvial navigation in
the valley of the Amazon and floating depots for the supply of coal and
oil-fuel will be established at different points of the river Amazon, its
affluents and sub-affluents.

The establishment of these depots and the business of supplying the
combustibles will be done by signed contract, with the Minister of
Agriculture, after the competition by public-tender, the concessioner
enjoys besides other favors, exemption from import-duties for the
floating material and for the combustible material imported as also full
exemption from all State and Municipal taxes by reason of the object of
his contract being considered a federal public service.

       *       *       *       *       *

The creation of centres for producing food-stuffs in the valley of the
Amazon being held as an element of the greatest urgency towards the
successful issue of the plan elaborated, is assured by the following
series of administrative measures: 1º, the renting out of the 2 national
ranches on the Rio Branco, that of S. Bento and that of S. Marcus, to
a public Company or undertaking which agrees to open up, and practice
cattle-breeding of different kinds on a large scale and the cultivation
of cereals commonly used as aliments, the establishment of a curing
establishment for preparing dry meat, known as xarque, and a factory of
alimenticiary conserved goods, a dairy establishment, a rice-mill and 2
mandioca grinding-mills. The company in question will take charge of and
localize the emigrants who desire to be placed upon the lands belonging
to the said ranches in accordance with the Federal laws regulating such
matters.

The favors of exemption from duties for the imported material necessary
to the mounting of the fazenda or ranch and the installation of the mills
and factories will be conceded, as also for the stud-cattle and seeds
imported and for the chemical manures and all materials necessary for the
factories and for the cultivation during the whole of the time of the
contract. They shall also enjoy the right to disappropriate for public
utility and shall have preference for the contract to carry out the
necessary works and improvements in the navigation of the Rio Branco.

The colonization of the lands of the “fazenda” of São Marcus situated
between the rivers Mahú, Takutú, Surumú and Cotingo on the frontier of
British Guyana, will be made directly by the Ministry of Agriculture.
2º Premiums and favors will be conceded to whomsoever may found great
ranches for cattle breeding and for great agricultural purposes in
territory of the Acre (between Rio Branco and Xapury), in the State of
Amazonas (in the region of the Autaz), in the State of Pará (in the
Island of Marajó), or in other more convenient points of the lower Amazon.

These premiums are of 30:000$000 per group of 1,000 hectares of
artificial pastures, planted and fenced round, of 100:000$000 per group
of 1,000 hectares of lands effectively cultivated with rice, black
haricot beans, Indian-corn and mandioca, and 100:000$000 per group of 500
tons of manufactured goods, of dairy produce and of preserved meat and
xarque, which may have been produced within a time-space of 5 years.

The favors are those of exemption from import duties for everything
whatsoever that may be necessary to the proper installation and
maintenance of the fazenda or ranch during 5 years. 3º Concession of
favors to a fishing company or undertaking, that shall be established
either in Belém or in Manáos, for exercising that industry and all
subsidiary industries connected therewith on a large scale on the rivers
of Amazonia. The favors consist of the entry free from import duties for
all the material belonging to the company as also for all the fittings of
steamers and other floating material and factories that may be necessary
during the first 15 years, encouragement premiums of 10:000$000 during 5
consecutive years in the event of the production of fish either preserved
or salted being maintained at a figure above 100 tons; the right of
disappropriation for public utility of the lands or buildings that may
be necessary for the undertaking, the exemption from state and municipal
taxes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Recognizing the utility of periodical expositions which are held as
centres of special studies, producing practical results by the sum of
knowledge which may be derived from them, 3 yearly expositions shall be
held in Rio de Janeiro, which shall embrace all and everything which has
relation to the rubber-industry.




THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE WORK—THE EXPOSITION OF RUBBER IN RIO DE JANEIRO
IN THE MONTH OF MAY, 1913


The Superintendence Department of the Rubber-Defence, a provisional
Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce on which
is incumbent the direction and fiscalizing of all the services comprised
under the Law No. 2543 of the fifth of January of 1912, has already
initiated its works, undertaking the execution of the following measures.

1. Resolution to hold a National Rubber Exhibition in Rio de Janeiro,
opening on the thirteenth of May of 1913.

2. Installation of experimental stations, 7 centres for the cultivation
of the seringueira (Acre, Amazonas, Pará, Maranhão, Piauhy, Bahia and
Matto Grosso), and 6 for the cultivation of maniçoba and mangabeira
(Piauhy, Ceará, Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Geraes and São Paulo).

3. Studies in the valley of the Amazon, in the basins of the rivers
Negro, Solimões, Juruá, Purús, Tapajóz and Araguaya, and in the territory
of Amapá for the establishment of interior hospitals surrounded by small
agricultural colonies.

4. Preliminary services for the construction of 4 of those hospitals
situated respectively in Teffé or Fonte Boa on the river Solimões in S.
Felippe on the river Juruá, in Bocca do Acre and in Montenegro of the
Amapá.

5. Drawing up of the plan and inventory of the cattle and buildings
in the part to rent out of the National fazendas of the Rio Branco;
idem of the part to be colonized by the Government and projects of the
colonial centres model farm for cattle-breeding, horse and mule-raising,
radiographic stations, etc.

6. Laying of a Decauville line of railway along the rapids of the Rio
Branco, in order to secure prompt communication with the national
ranches, which are to be let out.

7. Construction by contract or by administration of 3 dwelling quarters
for immigrants in the Acre, in Manáos and in Belém.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rubber exposition which is to take place in Rio de Janeiro, 1 every 3
years, will have for its object to show the triennial balance of rubber
in its various modalities, comparing it with the situation of the same
industry in other countries.

The first exhibition will be inaugurated on the thirteenth of May of the
coming year and will be divided into four sections; 1º The cultivation;
2º extraction; 3º improvement; 4º manufacture of articles.

The sections will be divided into groups and classes comprising the
native or cultivated plants, machinery, utensils, processes, commercial
types, studies and statistics.

Encouragement premiums will be conferred for the best processes
of cultivation, extraction and preparing and for the objects best
manufactured, whether of raw material constituting trade types for
exportation or as manufactured articles.

The sale of machinery, utensils and rubber articles and products of all
kinds will be provided for against payment of a small percentage, fixed
by the organizing commission.

Foreign products may be admitted to the exhibition, but without having
the right to a premium. They will enjoy full custom-house freedom from
import-duty, but should they be sold they shall pay the respective
import-duty on the occasion of their being handed over to the buyers.
The re-exportation of the products not sold will run for account of the
exhibitor.

Lectures upon the rubber-industry will be given during the
Exhibition-Congress.

The Commission which will carry out the Exposition of the thirteenth of
May, is constituted by their Excellencies Senhores Drs. Pedro de Toledo,
Minister of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce, Raymondo Pereira da
Silva, Superintendent of the Rubber-Defence Department, Miguel Calmon du
Pin e Almeida, Representative of the National Agricultural Society, Jorge
Street, President of the Centro Industrial of Brazil, Julho Furtado,
Inspector of Forests, Gardens, Tree-planting, Hunting and Fishing of the
Federal District, Representative of the Municipal Prefecture and Candido
Mendes de Almeida, Director of the Commercial Museum of Rio de Janeiro,
Secretary General.

The site chosen for the exposition is in the Quinta de Boa Vista, perhaps
the most beautiful park of Rio de Janeiro.

The preparatory works, such as the ground-leveling, laying-out of
gardens, adoption of pavillions already existing, etc., is now already in
full course of being carried out.

The opportuneness of this event, the interest evinced in it by the
South and North and the United forces of the Institutions that form
the organizing commission, will secure a very considerable number of
exhibitors.

The month of May, one of the pleasantest months as regards temperature
in Rio de Janeiro, is the season chosen by those who desire to visit the
beautiful capital and thus the gathering of visitors to the exhibition
will certainly be notable.

Thus appears certain the most brilliant success for the Rubber Exhibition
of Rio de Janeiro.




RUBBER EXPORTERS


ESTADO DO AMAZONAS—MANÁOS

    A. Santos Cardoso
    Ahlers & Co.
    Armazens Andresen
    Albert H. Alden, Limited
    Barbosa Tocantins
    De Lagotellerie & Co.
    E. Kingdon & Co.
    Gruner & Co.
    Gordon & Co.
    J. G. Araujo
    J. H. Barros
    Leite & Co.
    Mesquita & Co.
    R. Suarez & Co.
    Semper & Co.
    Scholtz Hartze & Co.
    Theodor Levy & Co.

ESTADO DO PARÁ

    A. Meirelles & Co.
    A. de la Reviere & Co.
    Alves Braga & Co.               Boulevard da Republica 34
    Adelbert H. Alden, Ltd.         Boulevard da Republica 32
    A. A. Antunes & Co.             Rua da Industria 27 e 29
    Barboza & Tocantins             Rua 13 de Maio 21 e 23
    Braga Sobrinho & Co.            Caixa do Correio 353
    Coutinho & Co.
    Candido José Rodrigues          Rua Senador Manoel Barata
    De Lagotellerie & Co.           Boulevard da Republica 24
    E. Pinto Alves & Co.
    Gumer & Co.
    Gordon & Co.
    Guilherme Augusto de Mendonça   Rua da Industria 43
    I. Serfaty & Co.
    Jeronymo C. Botelho
    José Furtado de Mendonça
    J. Marques Braga                Travessa Campos Salles
    Leite & Co.
    Mello & Co.                     Boulevard da Republica 37
    Pereira Bessa & Co.             Rua 15 de Novembro 30
    Pires Teixeira & Co.            Travessa Marquez de Pombal 8
    Pinho & Costa
    Pereira Lemos & Co.             Rua 13 de Maio 46
    Raymundo Vieira Lima
    Rocha Silva & Co.
    R. Ahlers & Co.
    R. Suarez & Co.                 Rua da Industria 59
    Santos Amaral & Co.
    Cunock Schrader & Co.           Boulevard da Republica 36
    D. Costa & Co.                  Boulevard da Republica 25
    H. A. Astlett & Co.             Praça Visconde Rio Branco 20
    J. Marques                      Boulevard da Republica 7
    Neale & Staats                  Praça Visconde do Rio Branco
    Sluglehurst Brocklehurst & Co.  Rua da Industria 5

ESTADO DA BAHIA—S. SALVADOR

    Ulmann & Co.                    Rua das Princezas 12
    F. Benn & Co.
    F. Stevenson & Co.
    Hesse & Co.
    Hirsch, Hes & Co.               Cães do Ouro 27
    L. Costa & Co.                  Caixa do Correio 133
    Ottens & Co.
    Rosbach Brazil Company          Rua Corpo Santo
    S. S. Schindler

ESTADO DO MARANHÃO—S. LUIZ

    Jorge & Santos
    Joaquim Julio Correia & Co.     Rua da Estrella 25
    Francisco Freitas & Co.
    Oliveira Neves & Co.
    Currha Santos & Co.             Rua Portugal 28

ESTADO DE MATTO GROSSO—CUYABÁ

    Almeida & Co.
    Alexandre Ador & Co.
    Figueiredo & Oliveira
    Lucas Borges & Co.
    Orlando Irmãos & Co.
    Ponce Azevedo & Co.

CORUMBÁ

    Yosetti & Co.
    Pereira Sobrinho & Co.
    Wanderley Bais & Co.
    Pasques Fillio & Co.

S. LUIZ DE CACERES

    Benedicto R. Villas Boas
    Joao Campos Vidal
    José Dulce & Co.
    Manoel Pedroso da Silva Bouden




                   MINISTERIUM OF AGRICULTURE, INDUSTRY
                               AND COMMERCE

                                  BRAZIL

                       FEDERAL LAW AND REGULATIONS
                       COVERING THE PROTECTION AND
                        DEVELOPMENT OF THE RUBBER
                            INDUSTRY IN BRAZIL

                 Decree No. 2,542A of January 5, 1912 and
                    Decree No. 9,521 of April 17, 1912

                 PUBLISHED BY THE BRAZILIAN COMMISSIONER
         THIRD INTERNATIONAL RUBBER AND ALLIED TRADES EXHIBITION
                              NEW YORK, 1912

[Illustration: HEVEA BRASILIENSIS.]




ACT OF CONGRESS

Decree No. 2542A of January 5, 1912


Establishing measures destined to facilitate and develop the culture of
rubber, Caucho, Maniçoba and Mangabeira, and the gathering and treatment
of the rubber extracted from these trees, and authorizing the executive
power not only to open the credits necessary to carry out these measures,
but also to contract such loans as may be necessary for that purpose.

The President of the Republic of the United States of Brazil:

Hereby makes known that the National Congress decreed and I hereby
sanction the following resolution:

Art. 1.—All utensils and materials destined for the culture of rubber
(seringueira), Caucho, Maniçoba and Mangabeira and for the collecting or
treatment of rubber extracted from these trees, whether for the purpose
of extracting or experimenting, shall be admitted free of all custom
house duties, including fees.

Only Section.—This exemption will have to be requisitioned of the
inspectors at custom houses, who will grant it without delay after
verifying the right of those seeking this favor.

Art. 2.—Premiums will be granted to those who start regular and entirely
new plantations of Seringueira, Caucho, Maniçoba or Mangabeira, or
replant old forests of Seringueira, Caucho, Maniçoba or Mangabeira, as
soon as the plantation has taken place, and will be paid on the following
conditions:

(a) For groups of 12 hectares (about 30 acres) of new culture, 2,500
milreis if seringueira; 1,500 milreis if caucho or maniçoba; 900 milreis
if mangabeira.

(b) For groups of 25 hectares, the replanting of native seringueira,
caucho, maniçoba or mangabeira, 2,000 milreis; for the first, 1,000
milreis; for the second and third, and 720 milreis for the fourth kind.

Section 1. These premiums will be payable one year before the first
gathering, when it is shown that the ground is entirely cultivated and
the trees well cared for.

Sec. 2. An increase of 5 per cent will be given annually in addition
to the premium offered planters of seringa rubber (to count from the
beginning of the planting), who prove that they have cultivated between
the rows in all the ground planted, plants of alimentation or of
industrial use.

Art. 3. The Government will establish, at a selected convenient point,
an experimental station, or field for demonstrating the culture of
seringueira in the Territory of Acre, in each of the States of Matto
Grosso, Amazonas, Pará, Maranhão, Piauhy and Bahia, and for the culture
of maniçoba jointly with mangabeira, in each of the States of Piauhy,
Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte, or Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Geraes, São
Paulo, Goyaz, Paraná and Matto Grosso.

These stations will furnish gratuitously, selected seed to all those
interested, also instructions as to the most practical and economic
methods of culture and will supply information concerning general
results, which will be verified at the end of each year.

Art. 4.—In addition to the indirect favors which are mentioned in Art. 1
and others which may seem reasonable and necessary, the Government will
grant the right of premiums of encouragement, up to the sum of 400,000
milreis to the first plant established for refining the seringa rubber,
that reduces the different qualities to a uniform type and superior to
that exported and which may be established in each of the cities of Belém
(Pará), and Manáos; up to 100,000 milreis to the first refining plant of
maniçoba and mangabeira rubber, that accomplishes the same purpose and is
established in each of the States of Piauhy, Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte,
Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Geraes and São Paulo; and up to 500,000 milreis
to the first factory of rubber articles which shall be established in
Manáos, Belém (Pará), Recife (Pernambuco), Bahia and Rio de Janeiro.

Only Section.—In order to have the right to the benefit of the above
article it is necessary for the factory to have actually employed a
capital four times as great as the value of the premium.

Art. 5.—The Government will put up three buildings to house immigrants,
to be of sufficient capacity and internally arranged, the same as
those on Flores Island. In Belém, Manáos, at an appropriate place in
the Territory of Acre, and also at places in the Valley of the Amazon,
where they are considered to be the most necessary, hospitals are to be
erected, surrounded by small agricultural colonies where the sick can be
received for treatment, be vaccinated gratuitously, and where medicines
of the first quality are kept for sale, especially sulphate of quinine.
Pamphlets containing suggestions about hygiene, prevention of the
diseases of that region and the practical remedies to use in the absence
of a physician, will be distributed freely.

The superintendence of these stations will be maintained by the Federal
Government, but the hospitals will be entrusted to professionals of
recognized ability, under a subvention or other favors, which the
Government considers reasonable and rules will be enforced which will
secure their proper regulation.

[Illustration: “SERINGUEIRA” HEVEA BRASILIENSIS. MULL, ARG. (11).]

Art. 6.—For the purpose of facilitating transportation and reducing its
cost in the valley of the Amazon, the Government will cause to be made,
as soon as possible, the following improvements:

1. The construction by the Government of narrow gauge railroads along the
Rivers Xingú, Tapajos and others in Pará, Matto Grosso, and of the Rio
Negro and Rio Branco and others in Amazonas, through the valleys through
which they flow, in accordance with the authorization of Congress, Law
No. 1,126, December 13, 1903, at the price fixed per kilometer, according
to the difficulties of the region, at the discretion of the Government.

In case the State of Pará and Amazonas should contract for the
construction of some of these railroads, the Federal Government for the
more rapid completion of the work will concede an increase of 15 contos
per kilometer.

2. The construction of a railroad, which, parting at a convenient point
of the Madeira-Mamoré Railroad, near the mouth of the River Abunã, passes
by the village Rio Branco, and at a point between Senna Madureira and
Caty, and terminates in the village Thaumaturgo, with a branch to the
frontier of Perú, by the valley of the Purús River.

The construction of this road shall be in accordance with the provisions
of Law No. 1,126, of December 13, 1903. As soon as the first section
of the trunk line is inaugurated to the village of Rio Branco, the
Government will install a custom house at Porto Velho on the Madeira
River and announce this port open to commerce with friendly nations.

3. Construction of a railroad starting at the port of Belém of Pará and
joining the net work of railroads of Central Brazil at Pirapóra, in the
State of Minas Geraes, and of Northern Brazil at Coroatá, in the State
of Maranhão, with the necessary branch lines to join the initial points
or terminals of navigation on the Rivers Araguaya, Tocantins, Parahyba
and S. Francisco. The railroad shall be built according to the provisions
of Law No. 1,126, December 13, 1903, and shall be leased by public
competition.

4. The execution of the works necessary for the effective navigation, at
any season of the year, of steamers drawing three feet of water; on the
Rio Negro, between Santa Isabel and Cucuhy; on the Rio Branco, from its
mouth to Fort S. Joaquim; on the River Purús, from Hyutanahan to Senna
Madureira; on the River Acre from its mouth to Riosinho das Pedras.

The Government may contract for the execution of these works by public
competition, or independent of competition, with one or more individuals
or firms offering sufficient guaranty, applying the provisions
established by the decree, No. 6,368, February 14, 1907, or others, which
will not impose greater burdens, and which may be more economic.

Art. 7.—For the same purpose as mentioned in the previous article, all
vessels of any kind destined for river navigation, are declared exempt
from all custom house duties, including fees, revision, rates.

Art. 8.—The Government will grant the same exemption in addition to the
indirect favors found convenient, to the contractor who will bind himself
at a public competition, to establish coal depots at points in the valley
of the Amazon previously indicated, and to supply steamers and launches
with fuel at prices approved by the Government.

Art. 9.—The Government will promote and aid the production of food stuffs
in the valley of the Amazon through the following measures, or others
which may be found convenient and promise satisfactory results.

1. The leasing of two of the National Reservations on the Rio Branco,
at a public auction or private competition to a reliable concern, which
binds itself to develop on a large scale, the breeding of cattle of
improved types, the production of cereals, and other foodstuffs, to
establish packing houses, dairies, rice-shelling mills, flour and mandiok
mills, etc.

2. Direct colonization, through the Federal Government, on lands still
belonging to the Union, on the S. Marcos Reservation, situated between
the Rivers Mahú, Takutú, Surumú and Cotingo, with native families of
farmers and stock-farmers, with a view of developing and increasing the
production of foodstuffs, as well as horses and mules.

3. Concession to concerns which propose to establish large plantations or
colonies under the above mentioned conditions, one in the Territory of
Acre (between the Rio Branco and Xapury), one in the State of Amazonas
(in the region of the Autaz River), and one in the State of Pará (on the
island of Marajó or other point more convenient on the lower Amazon),
granting them the following favors:

(a) Exemption from all import duties, including fees, for all material
imported, necessary for establishing the plantation, including buildings,
corrals, pastures, fences, watering places, agricultural implements and
machines for the cultivation, harvesting and treatment of cereals, the
installation of factories treating dairy produce and packing houses, as
well as cattle and seed which may be imported during the first five years
after the plantation is started.

(b) Premiums of 30,000 milreis for lots of 1,000 hectares of cultivated
pasture, planted and conveniently fenced, and of 100,000 milreis for
lots of 1,000 hectares of improved land for farming and actually planted
with rice, beans, corn or mandioca.

(c) A premium of 100,000 milreis for lots of 500 tons of products made
from milk, packed meats and dried beef, which were produced within five
years.

4. Exemption from all import duties, including that of fees, for the
vessels, instruments, machinery, drugs and ingredients necessary for
the installation and working, for a period of 15 years, of a fishing
enterprise, including the salting and preserving of fish, that may be
established on the Amazon rivers, and the concession of a premium of
10:000$ for five consecutive years, when the production of salted and
preserved fish shall be above 100 tons annually.

Art. 10.—The Government shall proceed to the discrimination, and
consequent acknowledgment of the owners of the lands in the Territory of
Acre, for the confirmation of their respective property titles.

Section 1.—In the verification the following should be considered as much
as possible:

(a) The titles granted by the Governors of the States of the Amazon, of
Bolivia and the former independent State of Acre before the treaty of
Petropolis.

(b) The mild and pacific possessions acquired by first occupation, or
from the first occupant, which shall be found in active exploration,
or with its beginnings and habitual residence of the possessor, or his
representatives.

Sec. 2.—The maximum area of each lot shall be 10 kilometers square.

Sec. 3.—The Government will review the arrangements of Law, No. 601,
September 18, 1850, and Decree No. 1,318, January 30, 1854, expediting a
new regulation of lands, with the modifications of the present law and
those which appear more convenient to the actual situation of the Federal
territories.

Art. 11.—Every three years, the Government shall promote the realization,
in Rio de Janeiro, of an exposition embracing all that pertains to
the national rubber industry, and on these occasions it will grant
premiums of encouragement, totaling an amount equal to that which shall
be authorized by law of the budget in force, for the best processes of
culture and treatment, and to the producers of the best manufactured
articles.

Art. 12.—The Executive Power is authorized to enter into an agreement
with the States of Pará, Amazonas and Matto Grosso, for the purpose of
obtaining an annual reduction of 10 per cent until the maximum limit of
50 per cent of the actual value of the export duties placed by the States
upon the seringa rubber produced in their territories, and the exemption
from any export duty, for the space of 25 years, to begin from the date
of this law, upon rubber of the same quality and derivation which may be
gathered from cultivated seringaes.

At the time the agreement is effected, the executive power shall issue a
decree making such reduction which the States may make in the export duty
collected on the rubber of the Federal Territory of Acre and conceding an
equal exemption upon cultivated rubber.

Art. 13.—In addition the Government is authorized to enter into
an agreement with the above mentioned States for the purpose of
establishing, in relation to the rubber of the Territory of Acre, the
measures of protection and defense, which they have adopted in relation
to the production, or other measures which may be thought better, and
having the power to issue the decrees necessary for this purpose.

Art. 14.—For the entire execution of this law and the realization of
the measures decreed, the executive power shall issue, as quickly as
possible, the necessary regulations; it shall open each year the credits
that may be necessary, rendering an account to the Legislative power the
year following, of the amounts expended, of the work done, of the results
obtained and making the operations of credit which such services and
measures demand.

Art. 15.—All laws contrary to this are revoked.

Rio de Janeiro, January 5, 1912, 91st year of Independence and the 24th
year of the Republic.

                                                     HERMES R. da FONSECA,
                                                     PEDRO de TOLEDO.




Order according to Federal Law, number 2,543A, Jan. 5, 1912

Decree number 9,521, April 17, 1912


Art. 1. The measures and services created by law number 2,543A, Jan. 5 of
the present year, for the economic defense of rubber, has in view:

1. The encouragement of the extractive and cultivating industry of the
principal trees producing rubber.

2. The creation of the refining and manufacturing industry of rubber
articles.

3. Assistance to immigrants, native and foreign, recently arrived, and to
the laborers already established in the valley of the Amazon.

4. To facilitate transportation and decrease its cost in the valley of
the Amazon.

5. To create central producers of alimentary foodstuffs in the valley of
the Amazon.

6. To discriminate and legalize the possessors of lands in the Federal
Territory of Acre.

7. To hold triennial expositions in Rio de Janeiro, embracing everything
that relates to the national rubber industry.

8. To authorize agreements with the States producing seringa rubber, for
decreasing the duties of exportation and for the protection and aid of
the rubber commerce.

Sole Paragraph. It shall be the object of each of these measures and
means referred to in number 8 and of the special rules, that they shall
publish at opportune times, as well as those referred to in number 6 and
that part of number 4 which speaks of the revision and consolidation of
the regulations of the coast-wise merchant marine.


TITLE I

The means of encouragement of the extractive and cultivating industry of
the principal rubber producing trees


CHAPTER I

The reduction of the cost of implements and materials employed in the
development of the rubber industry

Art. 2. The implements and regular materials in the list annexed to
this regulation, are free of all import duties, including the fees
when employed for the cultivation of seringueira, caucho, maniçoba and
mangabeira and the improved collection of the extracted rubber, from
these trees, whether it treats of the development purely extractive, or
of the development of cultivation.

Sole Paragraph. Materials and machinery which shall be discovered or
invented during the time this regulation is in force, which have special
application to the rubber industry, shall enjoy the same exemption from
import duties.

Art. 3. The exemption shall be quickly granted by the custom house
inspectors, from whom the claimants should require it, uniting all, or
only those necessary as the case may be, the following documents:

1. The last receipt of the duty of declarations of the Municipality or
Mayor to whose jurisdiction it pertains, by which is proven that the
claimant is developing on his own or rented property, the extractive or
cultivating rubber industry, or that he is a merchant established with a
house prepared for goods for rubber gatherers, when it treats of regular
objects of the first group.

2. Attested by the Municipality or Mayor to whose jurisdiction he
belongs, that the claimant possesses proper land and that he is about to
effectively undertake the culture of some of the trees above mentioned
and treatment of their rubber or an authentic copy of the concession
for this purpose, which he may have obtained from the Minister of
Agriculture, in case he treats of regular objects of the second, third or
fourth group.

[Illustration: CASTILLÔA ELASTICA.]

3. A detailed statement of the kind and quality of objects or material
which it is necessary to import, or has been imported, which it is
necessary to despatch.

Sole Paragraph. The importer shall become responsible, during this
period, to the exchequer for any errors that may have been made.

Art. 4. The product, drug or object that may be similar to that produced
in this country, will not be exempt from import duties, when the cost in
this market in which he would have to buy it was equal to that of the
imported merchandise, less the value of the import duty which he would
have to pay in the custom houses.


CHAPTER II

The money premiums offered to those who cultivate the principal rubber
producing trees

Art. 5. To every one who makes an entirely new culture of Seringueira,
caucho, maniçoba or mangabeira, or replants seringaes, maniçobaes,
couchaes or native mangabaes, shall be given, in the first case and
for groups of 12 hectares, premiums of 2,500 milreis, when it is
Seringueira; 1,500 milreis when caucho or maniçoba, and 900 milreis
when mangabeira—and in the second case and for groups of 25 hectares,
2,000 milreis when it is seringueiras, 1,000 milreis when couchaes or
maniçobas and 720 milreis when mangabaes, when the following conditions
are observed:

1. Sending beforehand to the Minister of Agriculture a plan of the
property in which he expects to make the culture, indicating the area,
water courses navigable for steamers, launches or only canoes, and of
the means of access from headquarters to the port (fluvial or maritime)
or the nearest station on the railroad, mentioning these respective
distances in case the property is situated in the interior. The plan
shall be accompanied by a descriptive memorandum, containing as much
detailed description as possible as to the nature of the soil and its
adaptation to what shall be principally cultivated, and to those which
may advantageously be subsidiary; the production of rubber for the last
three years in case it treats of the property in development, and about
the conditions of healthfulness.

2. It shall declare whether it is new culture or replanting that is
proposed to be done and in the second case the number of trees in
development the property has already.

3. When the cultivation is of Seringueiras one must declare whether
he expects to make parallel cultivations or not, specifying which and
whether they occupy the land planted to rubber, or land separate.

4. To communicate to the official charged with the fiscalization the
beginning and ending of the planting, with the necessary antecedence,
the year in which the first harvest will be gathered, facilitating the
examination of the property at any time, and as many times as desired.

Art. 6. The least number of trees per hectare for new culture shall be
250 for seringueira and caucho, and 400 for maniçoba and mangabeira. In
the event of replanting, when possible, the distance between the trees
should be 6 to 6.50 metres for seringueiras and caucho, and 5 metres for
maniçoba and mangabeira.

Art. 7. To those who cultivate with seringueiras plants of alimentation
or industrial utility, in all the land improved, or in other land equal
to one-third of the dimensions of the first, there will be conferred
annually, from the beginning of the cultivation to the year of the first
rubber harvest, a supplementary premium corresponding in value to 5 per
cent of the principal premium.

Art. 8. Premiums will not be paid for principal or subsidiary cultures
which in the final inspections for the first and the annual inspections
for the others, the trees show poor treatment or they contain an amount
exceeding 15 per cent of flaws.

Art. 9. The premiums shall be paid directly by the Delegacia Fiscal of
the State where the property is situated, in the preceding first harvest
of rubber, through the demand of the claimant, with certificate from the
Government inspector, declaring that all the conditions required in this
regulation were faithfully complied with.

Sole Paragraph. The inspector who makes out the certificate shall
immediately notify the Minister and will be held responsible at all times
for the value of the premium paid, in case his information should be
found false in whole or in part.

Art. 10. At sight of the documents spoken of in Art. 5, and after
examining them, the claimant shall be entered ex-officio in the general
register of farmers, existing in the General Directory of Agriculture
with the advantages and guarantees it offers him.


CHAPTER III

The Experimental Stations for the culture of rubber

Art. 11. The experimental stations for the culture of seringueira in
the Territory of Acre and the States of Matto-Grosso, Amazonas, Pará,
Maranhão, Piauhy and Bahia, and for the culture of maniçoba jointly with
that of mangabeira, in the States of Piauhy, Ceará, Pernambuco, Bahia,
Minas Geraes, S. Paulo, Goyaz, Paraná and Matto Grosso, have in view
with the experimental study of all the factors relating to the regional
culture of each of these trees, for the purpose of furnishing the
cultivators with precise data for the adoption of methods and processes,
which will make possible the economic and perfect production of their
respective rubber.

Art. 12. The experimental stations shall be established on lands that
possess the following requisites:

1. Climatic situation and agricultural conditions required by the nature
or quality of the plant to be cultivated.

2. The physical constitution and natural chemical composition which will
permit conjunctly and parallel the culture of the principal food stuffs
or plants of industrial utility.

3. Localization at points easily accessible by good roads so that they
can be visited and verified, as well in the fields as in the books of
registry of the farmers and agricultural accounts of the practical
results and economies of the different services and operations. The
existence of permanent water courses, or dams with sufficient capacity to
guarantee irrigation when necessary, and also other agricultural services.

Art. 13. The total area of each experimental station shall be from 80
to 100 hectares, so that there can be made at the same time in distinct
partial areas the culture of the portions destined for experiments
relative to each kind of tree and a demonstration of the normal
systematic development of the respective culture, for comparison of the
products and their revenue.

Art. 14. In the area reserved for demonstration, there shall be included
those which will serve as examples, being the first cultivated between
the processes that shall have proven the most advantageous and which are
sought to be introduced, and lastly of those generally adopted in that
region.

Art. 15. In each station there shall be reserved the land necessary for
the establishment of a nursery of fruit trees and the production of
selected seeds of alimentary plants or those of industrial utility, whose
culture along with the principal plant shall be considered advantageous.

Art. 16. Every experimental station shall have the following
installations:

1. A physiological vegetable laboratory, the proving of seeds and
phytopathology.

2. Laboratory of agricultural entomology.

3. Laboratory of agricultural, vegetable and bromatological chemistry.

[Illustration: FUMIGATING CAOUTCHOUC.]

4. Laboratory of microbiological and technical agriculture.

5. An agricultural and floral museum.

6. A corridor for machines.

7. A meteorological station.

Sole Paragraph. A station that may be established in a region where
there already exists a federal institution of similar kind, pertaining
to agriculture in general, the installations above mentioned shall
be reduced to numbers 5, 6, and 7 and shall be provided with a small
laboratory for the mechanical analysis of the soil, and utensils and
instruments necessary for the proving of seeds of useful vegetables,
so that a choice or selection may be made and their identity, purity,
quality and germinating energy may be verified, including in these
experiments those which refer to plants that are injurious.

Art. 17. To accomplish the ends proposed, the experimental stations ought
to:

1. Attend the consultations that may be held upon any agricultural
question in their line.

2. Execute gratuitously analysis of fertilizers, spices, plants and
water, when required by the nearest federal institute, when it does not
possess the necessary laboratories.

3. Distribute selected plants and seeds.

4. Study the diseases common to the plants cultivated and the means of
combating them, and explaining these things to those interested.

5. To publish yearly and distribute free of charge a bulletin devoted to
the relation of the works done and the useful knowledge acquired relative
to agricultural and rural industrial subjects, and especially the results
obtained as to the most practical and economic method of cultivating the
trees that produce rubber, and the most profitable subsidiary plants, as
well as the best methods of the treatment, conservation and packing of
the products.

Art. 18. There shall be admitted to the experimental stations, persons
who wish to gain a practical knowledge in any of the sections, at the
discretion of the Director, who shall fix the number of students in
agreement with the chief of the respective section.

Sole Paragraph. On equal terms, apprentices between 15 and 18 years of
age, shall be admitted, the numbers to be determined by the respective
Director, with the approval of the Minister, who shall have daily tasks
corresponding to their capacity and aptitude. The Director in the name
of the Minister shall give a certificate, on which shall be indicated
the work that has been done, to all those who have completed their
apprenticeship.

Art. 19. The plan of each station shall be organized to meet the peculiar
necessities of the zone in which it may be established, conserving,
however, the principal fundamentals already set forth.

Art. 20. The position of Director shall be held by a person who is a
specialist in any one of the technical sections, and at the same time
shall be its chief, an indispensable condition being that in addition to
his technical knowledge he shall have had a practical apprenticeship.

Art. 21. The technical positions may be filled, by contract, by native or
foreign professors of established ability.

Art. 22. To each of the stations there shall be sent a special regulation
determining for them their proportions according to the necessities of
the case, fixing the term and salaries of their respective personnel and
providing for the special necessities to come.


TITLE II

The creation of the Refining and Manufacturing Rubber Industries


ONLY CHAPTER

Art. 23. The first factory for the refining of seringa rubber that shall
be established in each of the cities of Belém (Pará) and Manáos, and of
maniçoba and mangabeira rubber which shall be established in the States
of Piauhy, Ceará, Rio Grande do Norte, Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas Geraes
and S. Paulo, as well as the first factory of rubber articles which shall
be established in Manáos, in Belém, in Recife (Pernambuco) in Bahia, and
in Rio de Janeiro, there shall be conceded the following premiums and
favors:

(a) Up to 400,000 milreis in money to the plants for the refining of
seringa rubber;

Up to 100,000 milreis in money to the plants for the refining of maniçoba
and mangabeira rubber;

Up to 500,000 milreis in money for plants for manufacturing rubber
articles.

(b) Exemption from import duties, including fees in the manner and by
the processes described in Articles 3 and 91 combined, as the case may
require, for all material, machines, utensils and hardware necessary for
the construction and complete equipment of the factory, as well as all
chemical substances, cloth and different materials, combustibles and
lubricants necessary for the working and maintenance of the factory,
during a period of 25 years.

(c) The right of appropriation for public use, according to the
legislation in force, of the lands and improvements belonging to
individuals that may be judged appropriate and necessary for the
equipment of the factory and its dependencies.

(d) A preference given by the Government for the purchase of the
products used in the service of the Army and Navy and the federal public
departments, which shall be manufactured by the factories, when they
can compete in quality with similar foreign articles—the contract for
furnishing the same, adjudicated every 3 years with each factory, for
those of their products which were classified in the first place in the
expositions mentioned in Article 95.

(e) Exemption from all State and Municipal duties for the same time as
in letter b, because the factory is considered to be of service to the
Government.

Art. 24. In order to claim these favors any company or organization that
expects to erect one or more factories, should conform to the following
formalities and conditions:

1. Present to the Minister of Agriculture a previous request accompanied
by the following documents:

(a) General and detailed plan of the factories;

(b) An estimate of the expenses for the first establishment;

(c) A descriptive memorandum in which the capacity of production of the
factory is declared the principal articles intended to be manufactured,
the lowest price for which it is proposed to wash and refine rubber,
which should be reduced, for each quality, to one type and superior for
exportation, in general giving the Government all the information that
will help it to form a correct opinion as to the nature and importance of
the projected establishment;

(d) Certificates and references which will prove the complete
professional and financial ability of the suitor.

2. To obligate himself in the contract made with the Minister of
Agriculture, the clause of reversion at the end of the combined term.

3. To allow the official appointed by the Government for the
fiscalization, to visit the works during the period of construction, for
the purpose of verifying the actual amount of expenses incurred for the
first establishment and determining the value of the pecuniary premium,
which shall be in any of the three cases, equal to a fourth part of the
expense, not exceeding the limits fixed in letter a of Article 23, as
well as to visit the establishment when he desires after it begins work,
in order that he may be sure, that the materials imported free of duty
are effectively and exclusively used in the products of the factory.

4. To send annually to the Minister, through the said fiscal a prepared
statement in which shall be specified:

(a) The amount and quality and the place where produced of the rubber
used as raw material;

(b) The kind and quantity and value of the products of the factory used
at home and exported;

(c) The number of employes, native and foreign, effectively in service
during the year, with specification of their respective classes.

Art. 25. The premium in money shall be paid, as soon as the factory is
inaugurated, at the National Treasury or at the Delegacia Fiscal of
the State in which it is situated, when authorized by the Minister of
Agriculture.


TITLE III

Assistance to immigrants, native or recently arrived foreigners and
laborers already established in the valley of the Amazon.


CHAPTER I

The Lodges for immigrants in Belém, Manáos and the Territory of Acre

Art. 26. The lodges for immigrants in Belém, Manáos and the Territory of
Acre, shall be establishments installed and maintained at the expense
of the Union, intended to entertain immigrants, native and foreign, who
arrive at those ports voluntarily or with their passage paid by the Union
or by the States.

Art. 27. The lodges at Belém shall have the capacity of caring for at
least 1,500, that at Manáos 1,200 and that at Acre 800 immigrants.

Art. 28. The plan of the respective buildings and the different
installations of the lodges shall conform rigorously to the conditions
required by the climate of that region and fitted for the special
necessities of service for which they are intended.

Art. 29. The construction shall be made by a public bidding.

Sole Paragraph. If the first public bidding is not satisfactory, the
Government can order the projected lodge built by the Administration.

Art. 30. Annexed to each lodge there shall be an appropriate building,
in which there shall be a special receiver of customs for the implements
of workmen employed in agricultural and extractive industries, and
indispensable for the carrying on of their work these implements to be
sold strictly at cost price to those immigrants who desire to buy for
their personal use.

To those native immigrants who during the times of drought in the States
of the northwest and going from there, may arrive at the lodges without
resources, shall be furnished free, by authority of the Minister, with
the implements indispensable for work.

Art. 31. The families of native and foreign immigrants arriving at the
lodges of Belém and Manáos, who do not expressly declare they prefer
another destination, shall be transported at the expense of the Union or
the lessee to the national plantations of Rio Branco, where according to
their aptitude and ability, they shall be settled in colonies, founded by
this one or that one.

Art. 32. At the inauguration of each lodge, there shall be applied, with
the modifications required by the special conditions of each case, the
regulations of the lodge on the island of Flores.


CHAPTER II

Hospitals in the Interior

Art. 33. For the purpose of reducing the distances and the time of the
journey for the inhabitants of the interior in the valley of the Amazon,
who must find a centre of supplies where they can be treated when sick,
or provide excellent medicines for their domestic ills; of proportioning
to all who may desire means of immuning themselves against contagious
diseases, and of creating a propaganda service of the hygienic habits
and practices necessary for everyone who must live and work in the
Amazon regions, there shall be built a hospital surrounded by a small
agricultural colony in Boa Vista do Rio Branco; S. Gabriel do Rio Negro;
Teffé or Fonte Boa on the River Solimões; S. Felippe, on the River Juruá;
Bocca do Acre, on the River Purús; at the confluence of the Rivers Arinos
and Juruéna; on the Alto Tapajóz; Conceição on the River Araguaya and
Montenegro on the Amapá.

Art. 34. The hospitals shall be built in places that have the following
requisites:

1. To have a plain of low elevation, conveniently ventilated for the
construction of the hospital buildings so-called and its dependencies,
and houses of residence for the personnel.

2. Existence around or close to the plain of dry lands, provided with
good and abundant water, which serve for agriculture and cattle raising
and of sufficient area for the founding of an agricultural community of
at least 100 families.

3. Facility for the establishment of rapid communication with a fluvial
port, or one that must serve them.

Art. 35. Each hospital shall have a capacity for 100 sick persons.

Art. 36. Each hospital shall possess the following installations:

(a) Five separate pavilions, each for 20 sick, each sick person having 5
cubic metres and an area of 12 square metres.

One of the pavilions should be installed with the necessary requisites
for the isolation of infectious diseases; for this purpose it should be
divided into rooms for isolation, independent and easily disinfected,
with the proper sanitary apparatus.

All the hospital buildings should have the windows protected by wire
screening whose openings should never exceed 1½ millimeter and the doors
provided with:

(b) A disinfectory provided with an apparatus to disinfect in boiling lye
and a stove for sterilization by the combined action of heat, vacuum and
formal. Annexed to the disinfectory shall be the laundry.

(c) A laboratory for the diagnostic clinics and microbiology.

(d) Surgical operating room.

(e) Clinic consulting room.

(f) Room for autopsies.

(g) Pharmacy.

(h) Sanitary installation, in which should terminate all the drainage
pipes of the hospital, destined for the bacteriological treatment of the
water used, which not until after this operation must be allowed to flow
into the natural river courses.

(i) Dependencies for the administration and quarters of the personnel.

Art. 37. In each hospital there shall be made in the respective
pharmaceutical laboratory a preliminary study of all the remedies used
by the people of that region to determine which are prejudicial and
which inoffensive. The respective Director shall show the people in
printed circulars, frequently and profusely distributed that their
use is improper. Those which are found efficacious and susceptible of
improvement, shall be sent for more complete studies in the chemical
laboratories and federal pharmacies, letting the people know the results
obtained.

Art. 38. When the installation of each hospital is complete, a contract
shall be made, by public bidding, or independent of it, as the Government
may think best, with some professional of recognized ability, the
direction and maintenance of the respective services, the contract
including the following obligations:

1. The reservation of one hour daily in the medical consultation room,
where the sick known to be without means may freely receive examination
and be furnished with the necessary medicines.

2. The maintenance of a bureau for vaccination against smallpox and
other contagious diseases by means considered efficacious, and to attend
gratuitously to all who may wish it.

3. To submit for the approval of the Government the regimen internal of
the establishment and a table of prices for the treatment of the sick,
which should be revised every 3 years.

4. To expose for sale in the pharmacy only medicines of the best quality,
especially sulphate of quinine and such other preparations, under penalty
of having destroyed all drugs known to be impure in addition to the fine
to suit the case that may be fixed in the contract.

5. To give a bond in money, or policies of the public federal debt that
will guarantee the good conservation of the establishment during the time
of the contract.

6. To distribute abundantly every six months leaflets containing advice
about hygiene prevention of the sicknesses of that region, showing in
clear language, within the reach of all, those that are improper and the
danger in the use of alcoholic drinks, and teaching what measures to take
and the common remedies which should be applied in different cases when
there is no physician to be had.

7. To be subject to the inspection of the Government which should be very
minute and severe as to the condition of cleanliness and conservation of
the establishment, the quality of the medicines employed and sold to the
public and the care with which the sick are treated.

Art. 39. The hospitals and all their dependencies and sections are not
subject to any duties to the state or municipality, being the property of
the Union and doing a federal public service.

Art. 40. To each hospital there shall be given an annual pecuniary
subvention, proportioned to the services to which it will have to attend,
until the income of the establishment and all its dependencies derive
a profit of 10 per cent, during 3 consecutive years on the respective
capital invested, which amount shall be acknowledged and previously
approved by the Government.


CHAPTER III

The agricultural nucleuses adjacent to the hospitals

Art. 41. The agricultural nucleuses adjacent to the interior hospital
shall be founded by the Union for the following purposes:

1. The production of foodstuffs necessary for the support of the said
hospitals.

2. The intensive culture and breeding of the plants and animals of
alimentation generally consumed by the neighboring population.

3. The constituting of fixed centres of population economically
equipped, which will serve as a point of parting for colonies of greater
importance, capable of gradually attending to the necessities that the
growing population of that region may be creating.

Art. 42. The preliminary studies, the plan, the preparatory work and
the different installations necessary for the founding of each nucleus
as well as the colonization of the lots, and their administration in
general, shall be done in accordance with dispositions of decree number
9,081, Nov. 3, and number 9,214, Dec. 15, 1911, observing the following
alterations:

1. The selling price of rural and urban lots shall be calculated on the
prices established in the land laws of the States of Pará and Amazonas,
as a base, applicable to the nucleuses situated respectively in each
state:

2. In failure of remunerating work, or when there is insufficient, the
judge of the administration, to maintain numerous families, shall furnish
them food, charging the same to the heads of the families, calculating
this furnishing at the rate of from 2 milreis to 3 milreis daily at the
highest, for adults and those over 7 years of age, and one half this for
those between the age of 7 to 3 years.

Art. 43. The indians and native workers localized in the agricultural
nucleuses shall participate in the advantages and obligations contained
in decree number 9,214, Dec. 15, 1911.

Art. 44. Having finished the preparatory work for each nucleus, the lots
first colonized shall be those devoted to the production of the foods
necessary for the support of the hospital which is in their neighborhood,
so that it can count on, from the time of its inauguration, a regular and
sufficient supply of these commodities.


TITLE IV

Improvements and measures tending to facilitate transportation and
decrease its cost in the valley of the Amazon


CHAPTER I

Lines of railroad transportation

Art. 45. There shall be constructed in the valley of the Amazon lines of
railroad transportation of two classes:

1. Large lines of transportation, making an integral part of the general
line of Federal railroads, with identical characteristics and comprising
the same principles.

2. Economic lines of transportation, of reduced gauge, provisionally
established for easy ways of penetration, whatever may be their
development, sufficient to facilitate access to and permit the
exploration of the virgin seringas and the good lands for cultivation
situated on the upper banks of the Rivers Xingú, Tapajóz, Branco, Negro,
and others situated in the States of Pará, Matto-Grosso and Amazonas.

Art. 46. Those lines belonging to the first class shall be immediately
begun and constructed as quickly as possible, the following:

1. Parting from the Port of Belém (Pará) and joining the general line of
railroad in Pirapóra, in the State of Minas Geraes and in Coroatá, in
the State of Maranhão, with the necessary branches to unite the initial
points or terminals of navigation on the Rivers Arguaya, Tocantins,
Parnaluyba, and S. Francisco.

2. Beginning at a convenient point chosen on the Madeira-Mamoré railroad,
near the mouth of the River Abunã, passing by the Villa Rio Branco,
and the point most appropriate between Senna Medureira and Catay and
terminating in Villa Thaumaturgo, with a branch to the frontier of Perú
by the valley of the River Purús.

Art. 47. The rules for the construction of these lines is prescribed by
law, number 1,126, Dec. 15, 1903, and both shall be let at public bidding.

Art. 48. The Minister of Transportation is to command the studies to
be made, to contract for the construction and inspect the traffic of
these roads, but he will furnish the Minister of Agriculture a copy
of the plans relative to the route and give descriptive memoranda of
the project, and when drawing up the papers for the bidding, shall
include the clauses which he shall judge necessary and opportune for the
colonization of the bordering lands and the development of the industries
of the zone tributary to the line as well as to attend to the eventual
necessities of the commerce.

Art. 49. The construction and the concession for construction of the
roads of the second class may be made by the Union or by the States
interested.

Art. 50. The Minister of Agriculture is the proper person to construct or
permit the construction of those Government resolves to carry into effect
at the account of the Union, as well as to authorize the payment of the
subvention of 15,000 mibreis per kilometer to those which were contracted
for by the States.

Art. 51. The technical conditions of the railroads of which Art. 45
treats in the second part, are the following:

A portable line of the Decauville type.

Weight of the rails, 15 kilos per metre.

Gauge 0.60 cm between the rails, least radius of curvature 40 M. O.

Greatest incline OmO10.

Weight of locomotives 18 to 20 tons.

Art. 52. The concessions for these roads shall be let at a public bidding
according to the rule established in law number 1,126 of 1903, or
independently of bidding with a person or corporation sufficiently able
with the help of the payment of the maximum subvention of 25 contos per
kilometer, according to the difficulties of the land it passes through,
paid by sections of not less than 30 kilometers, completely ready and
furnished with the necessary rolling stock, within 90 days of the date of
the respective inaugurations.

Art. 53. The concession for these railroads cannot be given to those who
agree to build then simply as transportation enterprises, but only to
those who will obligate themselves to colonize and explore, in proportion
as they may be justified, the respective marginal lands.

It is an essential condition for the validity of the concession, that
the contractor presents to the Minister of Agriculture within the
maximum term of one year, proof that he has disposed of the lands for
colonization, and a descriptive memorandum of the character and extent of
the industries he intends to develop.

Art. 54. Those railroads of this type which in the future may be joined
to any general line of transportation, shall be obliged as soon as its
gross earnings amount to 10,000 mibreis per kilometer, to make its gauge
conform to the same, and from then for all purposes becoming a part of
the general federal transportation system.

Independently of being joined to any railroad in general, these
economical railroads shall pass to the jurisdiction of the Minister of
Transportation and Public Works and shall be obliged to enlarge their
gauge to 1 meter, without other favors from the Government, there not
being a supplementary term of the contract, if it is wanting for its
termination in less than 60 years, when the gross receipts have reached
15,000 mibreis per kilometer during 3 successive years. Before this the
railroad may pass to the Minister of Transportation and the gauge be
widened, on his own account, when he shall think it to his interest, or
by a new contract, when the Government thinks it necessary to have it
done for the necessities of the administration or the defense of the
country.

Art. 55. In addition to the subvention per kilometer, there shall be
given to these railroads all the indirect favors received by the other
railroads of the country.

Art. 56. The maximum term for a concession shall be 90 years, at the end
of which the railroad will revert to the control of the Union.

Art. 57. Under the right of experiment, the Government shall promote at
once the following lines of economical railroads:

1. Parting from “Antiga Souzel,” or other point more convenient on the
left bank of the Xingú and ascending the left side of the valley to the
margin of the River Cariahy, with a branch which parting at a convenient
point, shall go to the Tapajóz and ascend the right hand side of the
valley until it reaches the S. Manoel which may appear advantageous,
ascending the secondary valley and continuing to the dividing of the
waters of the two principal rivers.

2. Parting from the confluence of the River Negro with the Branco and by
the valley of the River Seruiny, gaining the right side of the valley
by the Caratimani river and continuing to the upper Uraricoera, with a
branch parting at a convenient point at the request of the upper Paduiry
and a branch in the direction of the Villa Boa Vista.


CHAPTER II

Improvements for the navigation of the Rivers Branco, Negro, Purús and
Acre

Art. 58. The improvements necessary for effective navigation at any
season of the year, for steamers drawing 3 feet, on the River Negro,
between Santa Izabel and Cucuhy, on the River Branco, from its mouth to
São Joaquin, on the River Purús, between Hyutanhã and Senna Madureira,
and on the River Acre, from its mouth to Riosinho de Pedros, shall be
contracted for by public bidding, or independently of bidding, with
corporations sufficiently able, under the rule established by decree,
number 6,368, Feb. 14, 1907 or others which may not be more onerous and
may permit the assurance of the opening of navigation more rapidly on the
sections of the rivers to be improved.

Art. 59. In none of the contracts shall a longer term than 7 years be
granted the contracting party, to count from the date of its signing, so
that safe and free passage is given steamers drawing 3 feet in the entire
distance of the contract.

Art. 60. The improvements in the Rio Branco, shall commence with the
destruction and regulating of the Cujubim rapid, so that from now on
navigation is assured during the Winter to Villa Boa Vista.

Art. 61. The studies, plans, constructions, inspection and direct
conservation of these works are under the supervision of the Minister of
Transportation; but before the respective contract is signed, copies of
the plans and descriptive memorandum referring to the project shall be
furnished the Minister of Agriculture, so that he may be heard upon the
opportunity and the order in which these works shall be executed, in the
interest of the economic development of the region, and that they may be
conveniently attended by those casually interested in the colonization
and development of the industries along the banks of the rivers, or in
commerce in general.

In case it is found that the destruction and regulation of the Cujubim
rapid cannot be done during one season of low water in the river, the
Minister of Agriculture, by agreement with the State of Amazonas, can
order to be constructed a Decauville line of the type described in
articles 45, second part and 51, in the belt line constructed by that
State along waterfalls, so that the leasing and colonization of the
national plantations of Rio Branco is no longer delayed.


CHAPTER III

Complementary measures

Art. 62. All vessels of every kind intended for the fluvial navigation
in the valley of the Amazon are free of all import duties, including the
fees. This exemption shall be given by the custom houses of Belém (Pará)
and Manáos, through a requisition to the Minister of Agriculture, which
the importer shall have asked for, declaring in his request the number,
class and tonnage, the draft and the cost and the purpose of each vessel.

Art. 63. The vessel imported under this favor, if sold outside the valley
of the Amazon, or even within it, to a foreign country, shall pay the
proper duties according to the law of the budget in force in the year of
its importation.

Art. 64. Deposits of coal shall be established for supplying the steamers
which navigate the Amazon rivers, and for others who care to use them, in
the following places, or in others which be shown to be more convenient:
Belém (Pará), Cametá, Breves, Chaves, Mazagão, Gurupá, Souzel, Prainha,
Sautarem, Ponta Nova Brasileira, Obidos, Parintius, Itacoatiara, Manáos,
Carvoeiro, Moreira, Santa Izabel do Rio Negro, Carmo do Rio Branco,
Caracarahy, Boca do Canumã, Baetas, Boca do Rio Machado, Boca do Purús,
Campina, Nova Olinda, Canutama, Cachoeira de Hyutanahan, Boca do Pauhiny,
Boca do Acre, Rio Branco, Seuna Madureira, Coary, Teffé, Boca do Juruá,
Juruapeca, Mearary, Boca do Tarauacá, Cruzeiro do Sul, Boca do Jutahy, S.
Paulo de Olivença, Benjamin Constant and Santo Antonio de Maripi.

Art. 65. There shall be floating deposits, so that they can be moved from
one place to another, as the growth of navigation in this or that place
may require; they shall have sufficient capacity for the movement of
steamers at the station they are serving and passes modern apparatus for
discharging the coal, which will reduce to a minimum the raising of dust,
and load the steamers as quickly as possible.

Art. 66. At points where it may be thought necessary, the deposits shall
be provided with tanks for fuel oil, which can be placed on the platform
with coal, or on separate floating platforms.

Art. 67. The establishment of the deposits and the business of furnishing
fuel to the steamers, shall be by contract after a public bidding and
signed by the Minister of Agriculture.

Art. 68. The floating material for the depositories and the fuel imported
shall be free of all import duties, including the fees.

The fees in the custom houses shall be ordered through a requisition from
the Minister of Agriculture, from whom the contracting party shall ask
it, for each shipment, with the necessary data.

Art. 69. The fuel imported by the corporation can only be sold for river
navigation service.

Art. 70. The maximum prices at which the party can sell fuel to steamers,
shall be according to tables approved annually by the Minister. These
may be altered during the year, when so necessary in the opinion of the
Government.

Art. 71. The contracting party shall not be subject to payment of any
state or municipal duties, because the object is the public federal
service.

Art. 72. In places where the party has and the Government has not
deposits of fuel, to him shall be given the preference for furnishing
the quantity necessary for the national vessels of war, at the prices
received when supplying the vessels of individuals.

Art. 73. In extraordinary circumstances and at the requisition of the
Government, the contracting party shall place at its disposition all the
deposits of fuel on hand, being afterwards indemnified for a part or all
of the fuel delivered, and afterwards another payment of the value of the
deposits unused, corresponding to the profits lost during the time of
the interruption of his business, calculated on an equal period of the
preceding year.

Art. 74. The bidding for the contract shall be upon the terms for the
installation of the depositories, their reversion to the Union and the
selling price of fuel for the first year.


TITLE V

The creation of centres producing foodstuffs in the valley of the Amazon


CHAPTER I

The leasing of the national plantations of Rio Branco

Art. 75. The Minister of Agriculture can contract for the leasing of the
two national plantations S. Bento and S. Marcos, except the part situated
between the Rivers Mahú, Takutú, Surumú and Cotingo, by public bidding,
or independent of it, with a corporation or party sufficiently able,
observing the following dispositions which shall be explained and assured
in the clauses of the detailed contracts.

1. The party will be obliged to:

(a) Develop and practice on a large scale, by the best and most modern
methods the breeding of cattle of different kinds and the cultivation of
the usual alimentary cereals;

(b) Establish a packing house for the preparation of dried beef and a
factory for the canning of alimental animal and vegetable products.

(c) Equip a factory for milk products, in which in addition to making
cheese and butter, milk shall be prepared by the Pasteur system or some
other that may be better, in condition to be supplied to the seringaes
and estates of the interior.

(d) Equip a central mill for the treatment of rice and other cereals
and two improved factories for mandioca flour, as soon as the number of
colonies localized can produce a sufficient supply of raw material for
such establishment.

(e) Receive and localize the immigrants who may desire to settle on the
lands of the plantation, in accordance with the dispositions of this
regulation and with the decrees number 9,081, Nov. 3, 1911, referring to
the peopling of the soil, and number 9,214, Dec. 15, 1911, referring to
the protection of the Indians and localization of native laborers, in the
parts that may be proper.

(f) Present to the Minister for approval the plans and descriptive
memorandum, with as much detail as possible, of the agricultural nucleus
which he shall be obliged to establish and all the installations
referring to the factories and services necessary for the complete
equipment of the plantations, within the maximum space of 2 years, to
count from the signing of the contract.

(g) Be subject to inspection by the Government for the faithful execution
of the contract, on the terms therein established.

Art. 76. To the party or corporation the following favors will be granted:

(a) Exemption from all import duties, including fees, in the form and
by the process referred to in article 91, for all the imported material
necessary to complete the equipment of the plantations, including houses,
barns, pastures, fences, reservoirs, implements and machines for the
culture, harvesting and treating the cereals, installation of mills and
factories, improved cattle, seeds of alimentary and industrial plants,
as well as for the materials and chemicals necessary to maintain the
factories and husbandry, during the time of his contract.

(b) Right of condemnation for public use, of the property or improvements
of individuals, which may be necessary, in the opinion of the Government
for any of the services of the enterprise.

(c) All the favors specified in articles 131 and 132 of decree number
9,081, Nov. 3, 1911, native and foreign colonies being made equal.

(d) Preference for the contract of the works necessary for the
improvement of the navigation of the Rio Branco, if the price is
considered acceptable by the Government and the time for the completion
of the work not more than 6 years.

Art. 77. The term of the lease in the contract shall be 60 years, at the
end of which all the cattle for breeding and all the improvements then
possessed by the lessee shall revert to the dominion of the Union.

Art. 78. Within the term of 1 year, to date from the signing of the
contract, the Government will give to lessee a copy of the plans of
the plantations, in which shall be marked the water courses with a
specification of those navigable, the zone of forest and plain and the
situations of the occupants who may be found.

Art. 79. The plantations shall be turned over as soon as an inventory
of the improvements, and the number of cattle of each kind then on the
plantation can be made.


CHAPTER II

The colonization of the plantation of S. Marcos situated between the
Rivers Mahú, Takutú, Surumú and Cotingo

Art. 80. The colonization of the lands of S. Marcos’ plantation, situated
between the Rivers Mahú, Takutú, Surumú and Cotingo, on the frontier of
British Guiana shall be done directly by the Minister of Agriculture, who
shall order, without delay, to prepare a plan with the necessary details,
and afterwards carry them out as they may be necessary:

(a) A town of the aborigines;

(b) An agricultural centre;

(c) A colonial nucleus;

(d) An ambulant course of agriculture;

(e) An agricultural apprenticeship;

(f) A school of practical agriculture;

(g) An experimental station.

Art. 81. The colonization of the lands whether in the agricultural
centre, or colonial nucleus, shall be made so that each lot occupied by
a foreign colonist corresponds to at least two occupied by families of
native colonists, which preferably shall be chosen from those who arrive
at the lodges of Belém and Manáos, proceeding from the states of the
northwest.

Art. 82. Gradually and opportunely there shall be installed in the colony
lands, mills and factories, having in view the improvement and production
on a large scale of cereals and other alimentary foods.

Art. 83. In an appropriate locality there shall be established a model
plantation for the breeding of cattle, horses and mules, in which there
shall be made a comparative study of the native and foreign breeds,
which best resist the climate of that region, to verify which may be
most advantageously improved by the method of selection, crossing and
formation of perfect types.


CHAPTER III

The premiums and favors to those who intend to found large plantations of
agriculture and cattle raising

Art. 84. To large plantations of agriculture and cattle raising that may
be founded, one in the Territory of Acre (between the Rio Branco and
Xapury) one in the State of Amazonas (in the region of the River Autaz),
and one in the State of Pará (on the island of Marajó, or other point
more convenient on the lower Amazon), the federal Government will grant
the following favors:

(a) Exemption from import duties, including the fees, in the form and
by the process described, in article 91, for all the imported material
necessary to complete the equipment of the plantation, including houses,
barns, pastures, fences, reservoirs, implements and machines, for the
culture, harvesting and treatment of cereals, and installation of
factories for milk products, the preservation of meat, as well as for
cattle and seed which are imported, within the first 5 years after the
installation of the plantation;

(b) Premiums of 30,000 mibreis for groups of a thousand hectores of
pastures artificially planted and conveniently fenced and of 100,000
hectores and of 100,000 mibreis for groups of a thousand hectores of land
improved for agriculture, and actually cultivated with rice, beans, corn
and mandicaco;

(c) Premium of 100,000 milreis paid for groups of 500 tons of foodstuffs
manufactured from milk, and canned or packed meat, which may be produced
in 5 years.

Art. 85. The claimant of a right to these premiums must make a previous
contract with the Minister of Agriculture, in which he obligates himself
to:

1. Present within one year a plan of the plantation, in which should be
mentioned the river port that would serve him, the courses of the rivers
which wash it, with a specification of these navigable for steamers,
launches or only for canoes, the zones of forest and plain, accompanied
by the plan of installation to be made, a descriptive memorandum of
the services, and industries that he intends to develop and a detailed
relatorio, indicating the quality, the quantity and cost of the materials
necessary to import for the first year’s work.

2. Allow the plantation and all its dependencies to be visited by the
official charged with the inspection, when he is performing his duties,
to verify the proper use of the objects and materials imported exempt
from duties, the area, the state and kind of culture and the quantity,
class and quality of the goods manufactured and destined for foodstuffs.

Art. 86. The premiums shall be paid at the National Treasury or at
the Delegacias Fiscaes in Belém and Manáos, by a requisition from the
Minister of Agriculture, which the claimant must ask, attaching to
his request the certificate of the Government inspector that all the
dispositions of this regulation have been faithfully fulfilled, and
a statistical table of the workers employed during the year in each
industry and the amount of the annual crop, with the specification of the
quantity of each kind.

Art. 87. The contractor can colonize the lands of the plantation under
the order established in Chapter XII of the regulation under the decree,
number 9,081, Nov. 3, 1911; the national colonists coming from the states
of the northwest are made equal to foreign colonists, for the purpose of
the premiums of which articles 132 and 133 treat in the above mentioned
regulation.


CHAPTER IV

Favors to a fishing corporation

Art. 88. The Minister of Agriculture shall contract with some person,
syndicate or company, offering guarantees of sufficient ability, for
the establishment of a fishing enterprise, which with headquarters in
Belém (Pará) or Manáos, that can be conveniently equipped as quickly as
possible, to begin this and its allied industries, on a large scale in
the Amazon rivers.

Art. 89. The following favors shall be given the enterprise:

(a) Exemption from all import duties, including fees, for the vessels,
instruments and other maritime material; for all the material necessary
for the installation, complete equipping and establishment of the
enterprise on conditions which would enable it to be a going industry in
all its phases, as well as the drugs, ingredients, cans and boxes, or
materials to make them, and in general for all that it may be necessary
to import from abroad, indispensable to the maintenance of its vessels
and factories, during a term of 15 years, to count from the date of its
operations;

(b) Premium of animation in money to the amount of 10,000 mibreis during
5 consecutive years, when the production of preserved and salted fish
shall be annually more than 100 tons;

(c) The right of condemnation for public use, of the lands and
improvements belonging to individuals, judged appropriate and
indispensable for the installation of any of the establishments that it
is necessary to build on land;

(d) Exemption from all state and municipal imports because the object of
the contract is for the federal public service.

Art. 90. All the property of the enterprise shall revert to the Union, at
the end of the term for which the contract was granted.

Art. 91. The exemptions from duties shall be given by the custom houses
in Belém and Manáos, by a requisition from the Minister of Agriculture,
from whom it shall be requested, attaching to the request a memorandum
of the objects with specification of the qualities, quantities and ends
for which they are needed, and what are imported for the services of
the first establishment, and after this what must be imported for its
maintenance.

Art. 92. The enterprise shall be subject to inspection by the Government
as to the safety of the steamers, and processes employed in fishing, the
faithful use of the objects imported, the manufacture of preserving, in
which substances hurtful to the public health shall not be employed, nor
in the annual production of preserved or salted fish for the purpose of
obtaining the premiums in money.

Art. 93. Specimens of fish not well known, the party shall send one
properly preserved to the Minister of Agriculture, accompanied by a small
relatorio describing the place and conditions under which it was caught
and noting anything particular that might be interesting in studying it.

Art. 94. Every commander or master of the vessels of the enterprise,
shall make a written communication to the directors for them to bring to
the knowledge of the Government, the places where there is the existence
of any obstacle to navigation, indicating the position in a good sketch
of that stretch of the river, describing its nature and the route to be
followed to avoid it. These communications shall be transmitted to the
Minister of Transportation in order that he may place a signal on the
obstacle, and as soon as possible remove it.


TITLE VI

The Triennial Expositions Embracing All That Relates to the National
Rubber Industry


Art. 95. The Rubber Expositions shall be held in Rio de Janeiro every
three years, the first being on May 13, 1913; its object shall be to give
the sum of the triennial movement of the national rubber industry in its
various modifications, compared with the industry in other countries.

Art. 96. The triennial expositions shall include the rubber industry in
all its branches and shall include the following classifications:

1. The Culture.

2. The Extraction.

3. The Improvement.

4. The Manufacture of Articles.

The classes shall be subdivided into groups including native and
cultivated plants, machinery, utensils, processes, commercial type,
studies and statistics.

Art. 97. Premiums of encouragement shall be given for the best processes
of culture, extraction and treatment, and to the best manufactured
products, whether as raw material, constituting commercial types for
exportation, or as to manufacture.

Art. 98. The Government shall opportunely request the National Congress
for the necessary enactments to make these premiums effective.

Art. 99. The rubber expositions shall be true expositions held in
relation to the machinery and utensils and products of rubber of all
kinds, but the sale sought to be registered in a special book, by the
payment of a fixed percentage to the organizing commission which shall
apply this income to the interests of these same expositions.

Art. 100. Foreign products can be admitted to these rubber expositions,
for the purpose of permitting comparison and perfecting the national
industry but shall receive no premium.

Section 1. Foreign products destined for the rubber expositions shall
be free of all custom house duties, as established in Law No. 2,544,
January 4, 1912, Article 89, No. 6, but if they are sold, shall pay their
respective import duties when given to the buyers.

Sec. 2. Foreign products not sold shall be re-exported for the account of
the respective expositors.

Art. 101. The transportation of the national products destined for the
rubber expositions shall be gratuitous.

Art. 102. For these expositions there shall be prepared bound statistics
and relatorios especially relative to the former period and as regards
the rubber industry in Brazil, compared with the world movement.

Art. 103. During the expositions there shall be held:

1. National congresses specializing upon the rubber industry.

2. Lectures upon subjects previously chosen and illustrated with
stereopticon slides.

For the carrying out of what is ordered in this article, the organizing
commission shall provide for the respective programs and other measures
for its entire success.

Art. 104. From all the principle products exhibited some specimens
shall be selected to constitute a permanent exhibit, which shall remain
exhibited in the Commercial Museum of Rio de Janeiro, and in whose care
shall also remain some reserves to be sent to similar Museums in Brazil
and in foreign lands.


TITLE VII

The Direction and Inspection of the Service


Art. 105. The direction and inspection of all the service for the
economic defense of rubber, shall be in charge of a provisory department
of the Minister of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce, entitled
“Superintendency of the Protection of Rubber.”

Art. 106. The superintendency is charged with:

1. To receive, to record, to prepare, and to inform the manuscripts which
depend upon the despatch of the Minister.

2. To see to the effective and integral execution of measures of an
administrative character foreseen in the Regulation.

3. The study, planning, calculating and execution of the work that must
be done by the administration.

4. The study, planning, calculating, and execution of the work that must
be done by contract.

5. The closing, with the approval of the Minister, of the contracts and
the decrees relative to the concurrence of the States and Municipalities
for the works and measures which they resolved to aid.

Section 1. Each service that has been definitely installed and is in
normal working condition, shall be given over to a section of the
Ministry of Agriculture with which it harmonizes and incorporated or
subordinated.

Sec. 2. For the measure that is being executed as ordered in Sec. 1,
the Government shall provide that the proper lawful budgets shall be
apportioned of the means necessary for the maintenance, conservation and
development of new settlements.

Art. 107. The Superintendency of the “Protection of Rubber” shall be
constituted of:

A central section working in the Federal Capital.

A district section with headquarters in the national plantations of Rio
Branco.

Partial commissions for services that may be indispensable.

Districts of inspection embracing one or more States, in conformity with
the number and importance of the services under way.

Art. 108. The central section shall be composed of a superintendent, a
secretary, a constructing engineer, an agricultural engineer, an engineer
of the second class, two draughtsmen, two typewriters, a bookkeeper, two
clerks, a messenger and two servants.

The district section shall be composed of a chief engineer, an engineer
of the first class, engineers of the second class, agricultural
engineers, conductors of the first and second class, a draughtsman,
a bookkeeper, a paymaster, a customs officer, technical assistants,
journalists and a physician.

The partial commissions shall be composed of a chief engineer, the
technical and administrative personnel necessary, in conformity with the
work to be done, and a physician.

The districts for inspection shall consist of a chief engineer, an
engineer of the second class, an agriculturist and assistants to the
number necessary and sufficient.

The staff of the employes shall not be fixed, but vary according to the
development of the work, and will correspond well with the distribution
of the respective work and the special instructions opportunely executed.

Art. 109. The services relative to the triennial rubber expositions,
shall be directed by a special commission presided over by the minister
and composed of the superintendent, who shall take the place of the
minister in his absence, and of the members of the Permanent Commission
of Expositions, created by Article 89 of Law No. 2,544, January 4, 1912.

Art. 110. All the personnel of the superintendency shall be considered
in commission and dismissed when the work is finished for which it was
formed.

Art. 111. There shall be appointed: by decree of the President of
the Republic, the superintendent; by preferment of the Minister, the
chief engineers, the secretary of the central section, the engineer
of the first class and the paymaster of the district section; by the
Superintendent, the engineers of the second class, the agriculturists,
the physicians, the draughtsmen, the typewriters, the clerks and the
customs officials; by the chief engineers, the personnel who work under
their direction.

Art. 112. The salaries of the employes shall be those fixed in the
annexed table.

For the employes in the services which were incident to the order in
the first section of Article 106, the salaries are fixed in accord with
tables for similar service already existing in the Minister’s department,
increased from fifty to eighty per cent for those who shall be situated
in the valley of the Amazon, while the high cost of living shall continue
in that respective place.

Art. 113. For services which shall be thought advantageous, and when
they have good reputations, the Government may employ professional
specialists, natives or foreigners, paying them annual salaries not
greater than those in the table or a lump sum for the service rendered,
as may be advisable in each case.

Art. 114. To provide for the increase in the work of the Director
General of Accounts, in consequence of the services mentioned in this
regulation, there shall be added to the same Directorship, employees
of the Treasury and other departments of recognized ability and the
typewriters in commission accepted, under the proposal of the Director
General; working overtime, whenever necessary, in accordance with
Articles 68 and 71 of the Decree, No. 8,889, of August 11, 1911, the
work of counting, examining, inspecting and recording the expenses,
distribution of credits, advances, and other things of an urgent nature.

The expenses resulting from the order in this article shall be met by
the credits which were opened in accordance with Article 14 of Law No.
2,543A, of January 5, 1912. It pertains to the Minister to fix the
gratuities of the typewriters and the employes of the Department of
Finance to which this same article refers.


TABLE OF THE SALARIES OF THE PERSONNEL OF THE SUPERINTENDENCY “PROTECTION
OF RUBBER”

                                                            Monthly
      Classes                                               Salaries

    Superintendent                                         5,000$000
    Chief Engineer of the Section Rio Branco               2,700$000
    Physician                                              2,500$000
    Constructing Engineer                                  1,500$000
    Chief Engineer of the Partial Commission               1,250$000
    Chief Engineer of the District of Inspection           1,250$000
    Engineer of the first class of the Section Rio Branco  1,250$000
    Agricultural Engineer                                  1,000$000
    Engineer of the second class                           1,000$000
    Secretary to the Superintendent                        1,000$000
    Paymaster of the Section Rio Branco                    1,000$000
    Conductor of the first class                             750$000
    Customs Official of the Section Rio Branco               750$000
    Conductor of the second class                            600$000
    Draughtsman                                              600$000
    Bookkeeper                                               500$000
    Technical Aid                                            450$000
    Clerk                                                    350$000
    Typewriter                                               350$000
    Messenger                                                200$000
    Servant                                                  150$000

The personnel in service in the Valley of the Amazon, with perhaps the
exception of the Chief Engineer of the Rio Branco section, shall receive
an increase over the salaries mentioned in the table, varying from fifty
to eighty per cent according to the judgment of the Superintendent
because of the high cost of living in their respective places.

A third part of the annual salary shall be considered the gratuity of the
office.

To the technical personnel, to the paymaster, and to the physicians shall
be adjudicated by the Superintendent a daily allowance of from 5$000 to
30$000.

Rio de Janeiro, April 17, 1912.

                                                          PEDRO DE TOLEDO.

       *       *       *       *       *

List of utensils and materials exempt from importation duties, to which
Article 2 of Decree No. 9,521 of April 17, 1912, refers:

FIRST GROUP

Implements and Utensils for the Rubber Gatherer

    Axes.
    Hatchets.
    Knives and special apparatus for the incision of trees.
    Buckets, pails, basins of tin, zinc or other material.
    Pitchers for smoking.
    Machines destined for the coagulation of the milk.
    Cylinders for pressing.
    Colanders and their appurtenances.

SECOND GROUP

Implements and Material for Cultivation

    Electric detoners and their accessories.
    Dynamite.
    Mining powder and other explosives.
    Caps and fuses.
    Decauville lines.
    Mono rails.
    Aerial transporters and their accessories.
    Locomotives and stationary engines.
    Chemical drugs, disinfectants and insecticides.

THIRD GROUP

Materials and Utensils Intended for the Culture of Trees and Treatment of
Rubber, including:

    Materials for the necessary installations for the mounting of
      factories, construction of buildings, huts and houses of workmen,
      box factory and factory for rubber articles.

FOURTH GROUP

Chemical Substances, Raw Material, Thin Cloth and Other Objects Used in
the Treatment of and Manufacture of Rubber Articles

a. =Coagulants=:

    Acetic Acid.
    Fluoric Acid.
    Formic Acid.
    Sulphuric Acid.
    Hydrochloric Acid.

b. =Dissolvents=:

    Aceton.
    Ethylic Alcohol.
    Methylic Alcohol (C. H. 4 O).
    Benzine.
    Benzol.
    Borax or
    Borate of Sodium. (Na² B. ⁴O⁷ 10 H² O).
    Chloruret of Carbon.
    Chloroform.
    Ether.
    Essence of Therebentine.
    Methylbenzol or Tolnol (C⁷ H⁸).
    Solvent Naphtha.
    Oil of Camphor (essence).
    Oil of Dippel.
    Parafin Oil.
    Sulphuret of Carbon.
    Tetrachloruret of Carbon.

c. =Deodorizers and Disinfectants=:

    Camphin or Camphene.
    Animal Charcoal.
    Porcupine Grape Yellow.
    Anilines and their derivatives.
    Arsenites and their derivatives.
    Aureoline.
    Cobalt Blue.
    Methylen Blue.
    Bistre.
    Fixed White (Salts of Baryum, etc.).
    Creosote.
    Cresolin.
    Essence of Lavender.
    Essence of Lemon.
    Essence of Peppermint.
    Essence of Menthol (C¹⁰ H² O).
    Essence of Eucalyptus.
    Essence of Florence Lily.
    Essence of Mustard.
    Essence of Moss.
    Essence of Rosemary.
    Essence of Tomilho.
    Essence of Thymol.
    Farmol, Formaldehyde or Formalin.
    Nitrobenzol.

d. =Coloring Materials=:

    Cassel’s Yellow.
    Van Dyck and Bismarck Brown.
    Yellow Brilliantine.
    Bronze and its derivates.
    Orange Bleu.
    Brooksite (Mixture of rosin and oils).
    Bukaramuguiana.
    Pattison White.
    Paris White.
    Wax for cables (wax, asphalt and rosin).
    Cachou.
    Rosin Colors.
    Massicot.
    Minio.
    Murexide (purple).
    Paris Black.
    Lamp Black.
    Ivory Black.
    Uranium Black.
    Vine Black.
    Nigramine.
    Ochre of all colors.
    Orange Neutral.
    Salts of Mercury.
    Sulfapone.
    Terre d’Ombre.
    Falladium Red.
    Vermillion (sulphuret of mercury).

e. =Hydrocarburets, Heavy Bodies and Oils=:

    Stearic Acid.
    Fish Oil.
    Fichetelito (C¹⁸ H²²).
    Vegetable Fibre.
    Glycerin.
    Heptana.
    Idrialine (C³⁰ H⁵⁴ O²).
    Lanoline.
    Linoxine.
    Marito Lard.
    Naphthaline.
    Arachyde Oil (Amendoim).
    Cole Seed Oil.
    Wood Oil, Chinese and Japanese.
    Cotton Seed Oil.
    Layos Oil.
    Banba Oil.
    Oil of Wool (fat of wool from sheep).
    Linseed Oil.
    Corn Oil.
    Cod Liver Oil.
    Nut Oil.
    Olive Oil.
    Palm Oil (Attalea Excelsis, Bertholetin Excelsis, Maximiliana regia).
    Pine Oil.
    Ricine Oil.
    Soja Oil.
    Calves’ Foot Oil.
    Tung Oil.
    Vulcanized Oils.
    Nitrated Oils.
    Parafin.
    Pentan.
    Petroleum and all its derivatives.
    Stearine.
    Vaseline.

f. =Resin, Resinous Gums and Lacs=:

    Yellow Amber.
    Ambroid.
    Natural Balsam.
    Canada Balsam.
    Chypre Balsam.
    Sulphur Balsam.
    Perú Balsam.
    Therebentin Balsam.
    Talu Balsam.
    Benjoim.
    Colophane.
    Copal.
    Banana Gum.
    Lac Gum.
    Kauri Gum.
    Lacs separate.
    Enamel Lacs and all their derivatives.
    Rhus Lacs.
    Mastick.
    Rosin Oil.
    Ammonia Rosin.
    Bourgogue Rosin.
    Damar Rosin.
    Elemi Rosin.
    Hymenea Courbaril.
    Rosin (Copal).
    Jalap Rosin.
    Myrrh Rosin.
    Xanthorea Rosin.
    Sandarac.
    Storax.
    Therebentine.
    Venice Therebentine and its derivatives.

g. =Agents of Vulcanization=:

    Metallic Antimony and its derivatives.
    Bromurets and all their derivatives.
    Calcium and its derivatives.
    Caustic Lime.
    Chlorine (Cl.) and all its derivatives.
    Lead and all its derivatives.
    Sulphur and all its derivatives.
    Iodine and all its derivatives.
    Sodium and its derivatives.
    Zinc and its derivatives.

h. =Fibres and Cloth=:

    Cotton.
    Brass.
    Cabo Asbestos.
    Maselig Asbestos.
    Hemp.
    Banana Hemp.
    India Hemp.
    Sisel Hemp.
    Madrasta Hemp.
    Manila Hemp.
    Fibres of all kinds of vegetable or animal origin.
    Vulcanized Fibres.
    Raphia Fabrics.
    Lace.
    Flax Thread.
    Jute.
    Wool.
    Flax.
    Luffa.
    Japan Lacs.
    Nanking.
    Cotton Cloth.
    Asbestos Cloth.
    Linen Cloth.
    Paper Maché.
    Parameta.
    Rami.
    Silk Cloth, animal and vegetable.
    Taffetas.
    Zaputtine and its derivatives.

i. =Isolated Materials=:

    Asbestos and all its derivatives.
    Alexite.
    Algina.
    Amiante.
    Asphalt.
    Astrictum.
    Russian.
    Birch.
    Animal and Vegetable Tar of lignite, hulha and all their derivatives.
    Bitite.
    Bitumen.
    Colorifugos and all its derivatives.
    Cerasine.
    Cork.
    Cellulose and all its derivatives.
    Esbetine.
    Eshalite.
    Fermantine.
    Fassilite.
    Fucasine.
    Gasoline.
    Gelatine.
    Gilsonite.
    Hermetine.
    Karphite.
    Lava.
    Ledererite.
    Lithine.
    Lithocarbon.
    Manjak.
    Marloid.
    Mica.
    Mecanite.
    Oil of Tar.
    Okonite.
    Ouralite.
    Ozocerite.
    Ozotere.
    Vegetable.

j. =Divers Materials=:

    Citric acid (C⁶ H⁸ O⁷).
    Azotic acid (H. N. O³).
    Salicylic acid.
    Sehacic acid.
    Oxalic acid (C² H² O⁴).
    Oleic acid (C¹⁶ H³⁴ O²).
    Tartaric acid.
    Agalmatolite.
    Areometers.
    Alkalies.
    Ammonia.
    Salts of Ammonia.
    Aluminum and its derivatives.
    Alum.
    Starch.
    Auhydrite.
    Autibenzine Pirine.
    Astraline.
    Atmold.
    Whale Oil.
    Balenite.
    Balons.
    Salts of Baryum.
    Materials for bleaching.
    Bolus.
    Camptulikon.
    Afridi Wax.
    Japan Wax.
    Caruabuba Wax.
    Carbarundum.
    Materials for
    Beech Creosote.
    Chlorhydrate of Quinine.
    Cyanuret of Potassium.
    Caseina.
    Ceramyl.
    Vegetable Coal.
    Coal Dust.
    Horn.
    Mineral and Vegetable Waxes.
    Fish Glue.
    Coralline.
    Caokaline.
    Leather.
    Copper and its derivatives.
    Dextrina (C¹² A²⁰ O¹⁰).
    Dextrose.
    Diamond.
    Dichlorohydrine.
    Dielectrics.
    Dielectrine.
    Eburine.
    Sponges.
    Tin and its derivatives.
    Eternite.
    Flour.
    Potato Sediment.
    Felds Pathe.
    Fibroleum.
    Metallic Wires.
    Sheets of Tin.
    Lasts.
    Fuller.
    Fustian.
    Galalithe.
    Gas.
    Gaze.
    Fish Glue.
    Glucose.
    Glutin.
    Graphite.
    Mineral Oils.
    Gypsum.
    Hemalite.
    Hatschetine.
    Hydrofugine.
    Koalin.
    Kisselguhr.
    Compound Kirrage.
    Lactoleum.
    Lederine.
    Limeite.
    Lactoite.
    Lactites.
    Material for Polishing.
    Magnalium.
    Magnesium and its compounds.
    Magnesia.
    Magnesia Calcinated.
    Marble Dust.
    Morocoline.
    Nickel.
    Salt of Nipa.
    Nitronaphtaline.
    Organdim.
    Bones.
    Pagodite.
    Pantasote.
    Petrifite.
    Earth of Pipe.
    Pumice Stone.
    Phosphorus.
    Plombago.
    Pluviosine.
    Salts of Potassium.
    Poudre Rouge.
    Anti-ronille.
    Sand.
    Salitre (Nitrate of Potash K. N. O³).
    Soap.
    Sawdust.
    Silicates of Aluminum.
    Bronze Silicium.
    Hides.
    Luberine.
    Luberite.
    Metallic Sulphuret.
    Isinglass.
    Tannico.
    Metallic Cloth.
    Turfa.
    Tripoli.
    Trichopiese.
    Hulha Varnish.
    Wood Vinegar.
    Vulcoleina.
    Wallasine.
    Waterproof Varnish.
    Whaleboline.
    Xylolithe.

                                           Rio de Janeiro, April 17, 1912.

                                                  PEDRO DE TOLEDO,
                                                  Minister of Agriculture.

[Illustration: GEORGE E. PELL, ESQ.

Commissioner for the Commercial Association of Pará]




PARÁ


FURTHER DETAILS RELATING TO PARÁ HAVE NOT COME TO HAND UP TO THE TIME OF
GOING TO PRESS


COMMERCIAL ASSOCIATION, PARÁ (BRAZIL)

DESCRIPTION OF EXHIBITS.

                 Quality.                  Weight.        Procedence.

  501 Biscuits   Fine Island Rubber,     net 1,037 ks.  From the Islands.

  81 Biscuits    Fine Island Rubber,     net   804 ks.  From River Cajary,
                   Cajary,                               & partly islands.

  111 Biscuits   Fine Island Rubber,     net   756 ks.  From River Anapu
                   Anapu,                                & partly islands.

  235 Biscuits   Fine Island Rubber,     net 1,116 ks.  From Island of
                   Cavianna,                             Cavianna.

  145 Biscuits   Fine Low Xingú,         net   979 ks.  From Lower reaches
                                                         of River Xingú
                                                         (This parcel
                                                         contains two
                                                         lots, dry and
                                                         fresh, should be
                                                         separated and
                                                         marked “Dry” and
                                                         “New”).

  44 Biscuits}  on sticks                net   937 ks.  From Lower reaches
  10 Biscuits}  Fine Itaituba (Tap),                     of River Tapajos.

  10 Biscuits   Fine High Xingú,         net   696 ks.  From Higher reaches
                                                         of River Xingú,
                                                         above rapids.

   5 Biscuits}   on sticks               net 1,025 ks.  From Higher reaches
  34 Biscuits}   Fine Itaituba                           of River Tapajos,
                   (Tapajos) Cachoeira,                  above rapids,
                                                         and state of
                                                         Matto-Grosso.

  68 Biscuits   Weak Fine Rubber,        net   650 ks.  From Lower Amazon.

                Island Coarse Rubber,    net 1,000 ks.  From Islands and
                                                         affluents of
                                                         Lower Amazon.

  110 Biscuits  Cametá Coarse,           net 1,515 ks.  From River Cametá
                                                         and partly
                                                         Islands.
                Coarse Itaituba          net   302 ks.  From River Tapajos.
                  (Tapajos),
                Weak Coarse,             net   254 ks.  From Lower Amazon.
                Tiras (Strips),          net   119 ks.  From River Tapajos.

  20 Balls      Toc. Caucho Ball,        net   911 ks.  From River
                                                         Tocantins & Rio
                                                         Fresco.

  30 Balls      Tap. Caucho Ball,        net 1,061 ks.  From Higher reaches
                  Cachoeira,                             of River Tapajos,
                                                         above rapids,
                                                         and State of
                                                         Matto-Grosso.

  20 Balls      High Xingú Caucho Ball,  net 1,044 ks.  From Higher reaches
                                                         of River Xingú.

  2 Bags—1 Bag  Inaja Palm Nuts                         Used for curing
                                                         Fine Rubber.
         1 Bag  Urucuri Palm Nuts                       Used for curing
                                                         Fine Rubber.

  2 Boxes—4 & 5 Tin Cups, etc., for collecting Latex

  1 Case—No. 3  Natural Woods—2 blocks of wood and shavings, used for
                  curing rubber

  1 Box         Machadinhos (Hatchets), collecting and curing utensils

  1 Box         Wooden Stand used for curing large biscuits of rubber.




The AMAZONAS Section


AMAZON STATE IS THE LARGEST ONE IN BRAZIL

Area in square kilometers, 1,894,724.

Population, 600,000 inhabitants.

Capital, Manáos; 60,000 inhabitants, 32ᵐ, 40ᵐ height from sea-level.

It exports rubber and woods for construction and for other works, Pará
nuts, Guaraná and some other products.

Beans, corn, rice and almost every kind of cereals grow there beautifully.

It is put in communication with Europe by one English and two German
Steamship Companies, and by cable and wireless telegraphy. These
companies have improved their steamers, which go to Europe. To the United
States it is served only by the English company, every ten days. They are
cargo boats.

Principal cities: Stacoatiara, Manicoré, Humaythé, Teffé, Parintins and
Labrea.

Medium temperature, 27° 2′ centigrade.

Rains—Evaporation in mm., 1592,0. Height, 1525,3 (in 202 days).

Wind—Velocity in one second, 1ᵐ, 60. Direction, east.


EXPORTS OF RUBBER FROM STATE OF AMAZONAS SINCE 1827 UP TO 1907

    Years.  Kilograms.
    1837      802,410
    1847    4,286,570
    1857    7,134,195
    1867    2,969,070
    1877   17,403,574
    1887   43,454,671
    1897  106,424,423
    1907  120,434,947

From 1827 to 1852 the exports belong to Pará and Amazonas together.

[Illustration: COLONEL ANTONIO CLEMENTE RIBEIRO BITTENCOURT

Governor of the State of the Amazonas, Brazil]

[Illustration: PORT OF MANÁOS]

[Illustration: DR. MANOEL LOBATO

Commissioner for the State of the Amazonas, Brazil, also of Matto Grosso
and the Federal Territory of Acre]


RUBBER IN THE STATE OF AMAZONAS

General Ideas about the State. Progress in the Means of Transportation.
Climatological Conditions.

The State of the Amazonas is the largest one in the Brazilian Republic.
Notwithstanding its well-known natural resources that are not limited,
according to many persons, to the precious milk of the rubber tree—that
wonderful tree of fortune—which is disputed by various producing centers,
its vast territory is yet far from being completely and properly
populated.

The emigration currents towards that section have started lately, so that
the population of hardly over two hundred thousand souls a few years ago,
to-day is over six hundred thousand inhabitants, without any exaggeration.

As such changes are taking place the conditions of life are being altered
every day. It is true that there still prevails in the books of gay
tourists who consider humbug as a condition of inexhaustible success, the
impression that the native indians travel about half nude and armed with
arches and arrows, chasing the lost Europeans through such outlandish
regions of the world.

The remark, however, is not based on real facts. The native Indians are
not now to be found in very accessible places. The foreigner who lands in
the Amazonas capital, for instance, may be sure that his habits and his
civilization will not cause any fright.

It is difficult to find among the natives who possess some education and
means one who has not been through several European countries, especially
France; so that as soon as the visitor lands he notices an atmosphere of
modern improvements and all the novelty and gay spirit of Parisian life;
the latest fashions are found at once in Manáos.

The progress of that beautiful princess of the Rio Negro (Black River)
is most remarkable, because it is at the most only twenty years. Until
the proclamation of the Republic in Brazil, Manáos amounted to almost
nothing. From 1889 to this date began its stupendous development,
counting already over 60,000 inhabitants.

[Illustration: A. W. STEDMAN, ESQ.

Commissioner for the Commercial Association of the State of Manáos, Matto
Grosso, and the Federal Territory of Acre, Brazil]

To-day it has comfortable homes, good and solid buildings of artistic
architecture. Its port is perfectly fitted to receive the visits of the
large transatlantic steamers, which places it in communication with the
leading European ports. The navigation line for the United States, served
by an English company, is not yet of the required progress to insure all
the necessary comfort to the passengers who venture to undertake the
long trip. Furthermore, it is served by steamers that do not possess the
modern requirements of speed, which at present is of first interest not
only for the passengers who look for a pleasure resort as well as for the
intercourse of commercial relations with the world’s markets. That is the
reason why the interchange between Amazonas and New York has been rather
slow, which interchange could be of greater magnitude than it is to-day
if there was a more intimate knowledge between the parties.

I would not want to end this information about the capital of the State
of Amazonas without quoting some paragraphs from the excellent work, “The
Rubber Country of the Amazon,” written by Mr. Henry C. Pearson, Editor of
the “India Rubber World”:

“When one considers that this city is a thousand miles from the seacoast,
in the heart of a vast tropical jungle, with wild Indians within a
hundred miles of it, its presence seems incredible. In a way, it is as
modern as New York or Chicago. The latest Parisian fashions are there,
and almost anything that civilized man desires is obtainable. Prices are
high, to be sure, because both luxuries and necessities are imported and
subject to a duty of 100 per cent. But when something besides rubber is
produced by the magnificently fertile lands that surround it, Manáos
will be one of the great and beautiful cities of the world and living as
reasonable as anywhere.”

That progress, although it has been made principally in Manáos, in some
form is also affecting the interior of the State. The river navigation is
made quicker than before and on elegant and up-to-date steamers, which
navigate throughout all the tributaries of the Amazon River.

Furthermore, the Madeira-Mamoré railroad has produced a great improvement
in the transportation facilities adopted in the State for the quick
delivery of merchandise in the interior.

The most distant points of the territory are now connected by wireless
telegraphy. The news of the world can be transmitted daily to the capital
of the State by means of double river cable and by wireless telegraphy of
the Marconi system.

The climatic conditions are not so terrible as pictured in the minds
of the outside people, who do not know the real facts and the true
geographic situation of the State.

[Illustration: CAOUTCHOUC PROCESS No. 1.

The Men Set to Work Bleeding the Base of the Castillôa.]

Mr. A. R. Wallace, in his “Narrative of Travels on the Amazon and Rio
Negro,” and Captain Maury, in his book “The Amazon and the Atlantic Coast
of South America,” show themselves so enthusiastic over the climate of
Amazonas and recommend it “as one of the healthiest and mildest in the
world.” That easy enthusiasm is not so good for us as the competent
French engineer, Mr. Paul Le Cointe’s opinion, after many years in the
northern part of Brazil. Thus he expresses himself:

“The Amazonia, an immense tableland slightly concave, situated entirely
in the tropics, crossed by rivers of colossal dimensions, with lakes
and swamps, the remains of the original water basin, badly separated by
modern alluvium land, covered with impenetrable forests from which emerge
here and there some plains, ought to have a specially hot, damp and
unhealthy climate.

“That is the reputation which it has enjoyed for a long time and which
has frightened away the European immigration; but it is not deserved in
such an absolute manner; as a hot country is perhaps on the contrary the
less deadly for the settler as well as for the traveler.”


THE AMAZON AS RUBBER PRODUCER

It is indeed very difficult if not absolutely impossible to limit the
rubber producing region of Amazonas. In almost the whole of the vast
territory of that State there are found rubber trees and where they do
not grow, they certainly can be successfully planted. Over large tracts
of lands on the banks of rivers not navigable, there are extensive rubber
forests not explored on account of lack of population.

That exuberance of the Amazonian flora, that arrangement of nature to
furnish resources to the rubber extractor for many years, kept him away
from any other occupation except that of raising the arm and wounding the
tree of fortune in order to obtain prosperity. There was no necessity of
planting that which the open road of the forest presents at each step;
also why worry with a view to obtaining any other process of securing the
“=hevea brasiliensis=” when its milk in the primitive state is obtained
at the lowest price of exploitation and cultivation, preserving all the
excellent qualities of the rubber?

The presence of competitors in the world’s market, more than the damage
caused to the health by the smoking process of coagulation, is the
reason to establish new exploitation. The rubber plantation is now being
conducted perhaps without obeying the scientific criterion, but more in
the shape of facilitating the gathering of the =latex=.

[Illustration: RUBBER-WORKER PERREIRA AND WIFE IN THEIR SUNDAY CLOTHES.]

One hears a good deal about high prices in the Amazonas, and careless
observers state in opposition to that the cheapness of life in the
Asiatic Islands and other points of the world. I do not think that a
thoughtful person without any interest in connection with enterprises
and plantations elsewhere in the world, would be able to use such an
assertion, which is so unjust.

The French engineer, Mr. Paul Le Cointe, who is an expert in the matter,
writes the following:

“For the work to be executed, the number of workmen required is much less
where the production of those men is high, hence to calculate the price
of hand work, the individual production is the factor that may become
more important than the pay to the men who work by the day.

“In the Far East, the workmen are paid from Fr. 75 to Fr. 1.25, equal to
14 cents to 23 cents, approximately, including feeding. In the Amazonas,
the pay per day amounts to Frs. 4.75, or that is, almost 91 cents for all
the work, which is three to four times more.”

Let us examine the cost in Asia and in the Amazonas for the different
work required by the cultivation of the rubber trees.

According to Mr. Stanley Arden, it is about 38 cents for each kilogram
of rubber in the plantation (the data that I am presenting in connection
with this matter is from the book of Mr. Le Cointe, entitled “Le
Caoutchouc Amazonien et son Concurrent Asiatique”).

Mr. Lamy Torrilhon speaks about the Kuala Lampur Rubber Company (Malay),
which had in 1909, 404,012 rubber trees from one to six years old.
Calculating the price of cultivation of that rubber at Fr. 4 per kilogram
or approximately 76 cents, Mr. Stanley Arden also calculated that the
cost of a hectar of plantation before reaching the period of exploitation
(the sixth year, according to him) was only Fr. 816, or more or less
$157, including the salaries and establishment of European employees, and
Mr. M. G. Vernet, of the Pasteur Institute of Nha-Trang, calculated Fr.
3,000, about $580.

Mr. Le Cointe further states that Mr. Stanley Arden in his calculations
of expense seems to presume the plantation in lands not thickly wooded,
because he counts for the burning and clearing of the land, hardly
one-third the cost of felling the trees, when in the forest it is about
the same. Of course, lands not properly protected and in the virgin state
in the tropical countries, are less fertile than those covered with thick
forests, furthermore the lands that have been devoted to a prolonged
cultivation of plants, like coffee, tea, etc., are to a large extent
exhausted, and if rubber trees were attempted to be planted there, the
result would be that it would largely lose the advantages by having to
fell new trees.

[Illustration: BRANDING RUBBER ON THE SAND-BAR.]

Mr. Le Cointe also speaks of about 225 trees per kilogram, when
practically that number can be doubled; besides this the calculation made
by the same author of about $18 for the clearing of the hectar, at the
rate of $14 per day for each workman shows that the price for that work
in almost clean land will take sixty-two days, whereas in the Amazonas we
only count on twenty-six days for each clearing of a hectar in a virgin
forest.

This argument, it seems to me, shows that there is a purpose to bring up
a cheapness which is more apparent than real, with the determination of
recommending the Asiatic plantations to the detriment of the Amazonas
rubber plantations.

This plan of attack is not the most correct one. We have the advantage
of having workmen who easily adapt themselves to the producing land, and
with the measures of protection that the Government is going to guarantee
to the rubber planters, the life of the contractor is going to become
easier.

The tree which is planted in its own region, is less subject to ravages,
being less persecuted by the destroying parasites, is not violently fell
by hard winds.

As every day increases the number of industries which requires rubber
as a raw material, it is therefore necessary to exploit it in different
centers, counting even with possible disaster, but nowhere in the world,
in accordance with the most reliable statistics, is there more favorable
land for the planting of rubber trees than in the various territories
of the Amazonas. That territory has been placed by nature to be the
emporium of that industry, and counts with all the means to preserve
that privilege, and for the guarantee of the planter as soon as the
rubber tree develops itself, it has other resinous trees suitable for
construction, and excellent fibres which can be sold at a profit. The
Brazilian walnut is so abundant there that it is a second source of
income in the State of Amazonas.


THE PRODUCTION OF RUBBER

Only during the first six months of this year, notwithstanding that
the time for the full crop was not as yet due, from Manáos there were
exported to the United States 2,328,389 kilograms of fine rubber, 602,180
medium quality, sernamby 991,088, caucho 798,024; to Europe, first
quality 2,449,776, medium quality 407,278, sernamby 507,860, caucho
1,368,489; from Itacoatiara, first quality 37,240, medium 3,858, sernamby
26,237, caucho 11,405, that is for the Amazonas a total of 9,531,824
kilograms, almost half of the export of 22,902,401 kilograms made in that
period for that State, besides that of Pará and Iquitos. The production
of Amazonas in 1910 was 10,466,231 kilograms; in 1911, 10,122,242; this
year, it is expected that there will be an increase of more than 15 per
cent of the production of last year.

[Illustration: THE INTERIOR OF A RUBBER-WORKER’S HUT.

There Were Always Two or Three Hammocks.]

This is due only to the active work of a few thousand workmen. What would
be the colossal production of that territory, when the work of the men
will be facilitated by a rational distribution of rubber trees!

Reflecting upon that, I am reminded of the words of Dr. T. Huber:

“A regular planting industry will have a marked and salutary influence
upon the extraction of wild rubber and the management of wild rubber
forests.”

Furthermore, I have the full conviction that the future of that industry
competently managed will offer in Amazonas, and in order to be more
exact, in Brazil, more guarantees of success than in any other region in
the world.

                                                                M. LOBATO.

[Illustration: RUBBER-WORKERS’ HOME NEAR LAKE INNOCENCE.]




BRAZIL

The States of Amazonas and Matto-Grosso, and the Acre Territory


The Commercial Association of Amazonas exhibits samples of rubber from
the States of Amazonas and Matto-Grosso, and from the Acre Territory,
having been authorized by the respective Governments for this purpose.


STATE OF AMAZONAS

The main stream of the River Amazon flows through the entire territory of
this State, and within its boundaries is joined by many tributaries.

The boundary with the State of Pará is formed by the same river, and that
with Matto-Grosso and the Republic of Bolivia by the Upper Madeira River.
The River Javary, a tributary of the Solimões (or Upper Amazon), forms
the boundary with Perú, as does the Upper Rio Negro (the waters of which
connect with the Orinoco through the Cassiquari Canal), with Venezuela.
Before the formation of the Federal Acre Territory, the upper reaches of
the Rivers Acre, Purús, and Juruá also constituted the frontiers of the
State of Amazonas with Perú and Bolivia.

The capital of the State, Manáos, is situated in the bay of the Rio
Negro, three days distant by steamer from the capital of the adjoining
State, Pará. The nearest European port, Lisbon, can be reached in
thirteen days, and New York in eighteen days.

Manáos is the turning-point for ocean going steamers from the United
States of America, and Europe, as well as from the South of Brazil.

The companies engaged in the transatlantic service are:

=The Booth Steamship Co., Ltd.= (British), with four sailings each way
to and from Liverpool per month, calling at Itacoatiara, Pará, Madeira,
Lisbon, Leixoes (Oporto), Vigo and Cherbourg, and three sailings to and
from New York per month, calling at Pará and Barbadoes.

=The Hamburg-Amerika Line= and =Hamburg-Sudamerikanische
Dampfschiffahrts-Gesellschaft= (German), with two sailings per month to
and from Hamburg, calling at Pará, Madeira, Lisbon, Leixoes (Oporto),
Havre and Antwerp. =The Booth Steamship Co., Ltd.=, also runs two lines,
one from Liverpool and the other from New York, as far as Iquitos, the
capital and principal port of the Loreto province of Perú. Maritime
communication with Southern Brazil is maintained by the “=Lloyd
Brazileiro=” and the “=Cia. de Commercio e Navegação=,” the former having
six steamers per month, and the latter three. The voyage from Manáos to
Rio de Janeiro occupies from 14 to 16 days.

[Illustration: MAP OF MANÁOS]

The river navigation is controlled by the Amazon River Navigation Co.
(1911), Ltd., and numerous private steamers, which form a flotilla only
to be compared with that of the River Mississippi. A new company “A
Companhia Navegação do Amazonas” is about to commence operations. All
these steamers call at Manáos, or have their headquarters there.

Telegraphic communication is as follows: By means of the =Amazon
Telegraph Co., Ltd.=, in combination with the Western Telegraph Co. to
and from all parts of the world.

=Wireless Telegraphy= (Marconi and Telefunken systems), is already making
considerable headway. The Marconi station at Manáos, in the hands of the
Madeira Mamoré Railway Co., receives and transmits messages to and from
Porto Velho, on the Madeira River, the starting point and headquarters
of the railroad, as well as to and from the Telefunken stations at Senna
Madureira, Empreza and Cruzeiro do Sul (the capital towns of the three
divisions of the Acre Territory).

These last stations are not yet open for use by the public, and other
intermediate stations are still in course of construction.

Manáos has also a station of the =Amazon Wireless Telegraph & Telephone
Co., Ltd.=, which transmits messages to Pará, and has lately been in
regular communication with the station in Iquitos belonging to the
Peruvian Government. By this route it is possible to send messages to
Lima, the capital of Perú, on the Pacific Coast. However, the Company
mentioned has so far not succeeded in obtaining the official permission
of the Brazilian Government to operate in Brazil.

Manáos has a permanent population of upwards of 70,000 inhabitants. Its
houses and public buildings conform to modern architectural ideas, and
some of its buildings, such as the State Theatre, the Public Library,
the Palace of Justice and the “Benjamin Constant” Orphan Asylum are
magnificent.

The streets, squares and avenues are well lighted by electricity and
the town possesses an excellent electric tramway system. The drainage
scheme is almost completed, and the water supply is very satisfactory.
The port works are in the hands of the Manáos Harbor, Ltd. There are some
excellent hotels, and a splendid telephone service.

The following banks carry on operations in Manáos:

=The London & Brazilian Bank, Ltd.=, and =The London & River Plate Bank,
Ltd.= (British), agencies.

=Banco do Brazil= (Brazilian), agency.

=Banco Amazonense= (Brazilian), Head Office.

[Illustration: A “SERINGUEIRO” TAPPING A RUBBER TREE.]

=Banking Firms=: Zarges Ohliger & Co. (German).

=Life, Fire & Marine Insurance Companies=:

Northern Insurance Co. (British), agency.

Royal Insurance Co. (British), agency.

“Mannheim” Insurance Co. (German), agency.

Lloyd Amazonense (Brazilian), head office.

And agencies of the following Brazilian companies: Garantia da Amazonia,
Seguradora Paraense, Allianca da Bahia, Commercial Paraense, Lloyd
Paraense, Allianca Paraense.

Rubber is the chief industry of the State, being its principal product
and source of income. The predominance of this industry dates from 1863,
and within a few years it superseded entirely the planting of rice,
coffee, cocoa, sugar cane, beans and maize.

Up to 1870 rubber was generally exported in the form of roughly made
shoes, hats and caps, as well as in sacks and in bulk, the greater part
of it going to New York, via Pará. Later, the present system of biscuits
or balls, cut and packed in cases, came into use.

Considerable business has always been done in Amazon with the United
States of America, although formerly the proportion shipped to America
was greater than at present, as it was only in later years that the heavy
competition by London and Liverpool came into being.

The production of the various rivers during 1911 was:

    River Solimões        865,000 kilos
          Purús         3,019,000   ”
          Acre            371,000   ”
          Juruá         2,055,000   ”
          Madeira       1,370,000   ”
          Javary        1,420,000   ”
          Japurá           70,000   ”
          Jutahy          287,000   ”
          Negro           679,000   ”
          Branco           33,000   ”
          Lower Amazon    194,000   ”

The rubber exporting houses are:

    Zarges Ohliger & Co. (German).
    Adelbert H. Alden, Ltd. (American).
    Ahlers & Co. (German).
    General Rubber Co. of Brazil (American).
    De Lagotellerie & Co. (French).

[Illustration: “DEFUMADOR,” OR SMOKING-HUT.]


STATE OF AMAZON EXHIBIT INCLUDES:

    Pyramid of 50 tons rubber.
    Models of River Steamers.
    Rubber Milk.
    Photographs and Maps.
    Rubber Toys, etc., made by natives.
    Basins, Pails, etc.
    Large Rubber Tree Stump and several Young Rubber Trees.

                       =Exhibited by Messrs. Asenei & Co., River Madeira.=

    Rubber Milk.
    Nuts and Appliances for Smoking Rubber.

                           =Exhibited by Sno. Raymundo Monteiro da Costa.=


COMPARATIVE RUBBER STATISTICS

            Comparative Rates of Fine Pará.
             Liverpool.          New York.

           s. d.     s. d.
    1894   2  9  to  3  1     $0.64½ to $0.73
    1895   3  0¼ to  3  4¼      .70  to   .81½
    1896   3  0½ to  3  8¾      .71  to   .85
    1897   3  5  to  3  9       .79½ to   .89
    1898   3  7½ to  4  5       .82  to  1.06
    1899   3 10  to  4  7¼      .91  to  1.10
    1900   3  8½ to  4  9       .83  to  1.11½
    1901   3  4  to  3 11½      .76  to   .95
    1902   2 10  to  3  9½      .66  to   .92
    1903   3  6¼ to  4  8       .78  to  1.13
    1904   3 10¾ to  5  6       .89  to  1.32
    1905   4 10¼ to  5  8¾     1.13  to  1.35
    1906   4 11½ to  5  5½     1.16  to  1.28
    1907   2 11¾ to  5  3       .69  to  1.24
    1908   2  9¼ to  5  5       .65  to  1.30
    1909   4 10  to  9  2      1.13  to  2.15
    1910   4 10  to 12  4½     1.16  to  2.90
    1911   3 10  to  7  1       .90  to  1.67




FEDERAL TERRITORY OF ACRE

[Illustration: SERINGUEIRO SMOKING RUBBER AT ALTO ACRE.]




THE ACRE

THE FLUVIAL REGION THAT IS RICHEST IN RUBBER


As far as the wealth of rubber obtained from natural sources is
concerned, Brazil ranks first among all the world’s rubber producing
countries. While the East Indian section, with its plantation grown
product, has already outstripped her in the quantity of its annual
plantation output, the superior excellence of genuine Pará rubber has not
been attained. The “fine rubber” that comes from the inundated region of
the lower river country is best known. In the upper districts of various
southern affluents, fine rubber trees grow, but no longer in the lowlands
that have long been subject to inundation, they occur rather in forests
that are overflowed seldom, if at all, that even extend over the hilly
districts. The method of collection and the entire operation of rubber
production varies in many respects from the more familiar methods of
the inundated districts. This applies particularly to Acre, with its
characteristic and peculiar river section.

To explore this section, from economic and scientific points of view, I
undertook a journey last year, 1911, at the instance of the Associação
Commercial.

The results of this journey will be embodied in a detail report, it is at
present proposed to make only a brief summary to supplement the pictures
shown in the exhibition.

Our better knowledge of Acre dates back barely a quarter of a century. At
that period uncertainty prevailed as to which of the countries adjoining
Acre, Brazil, Bolivia and Perú, were the owners of the territory. In
more recent times these conditions have been adjusted, the greater part
having been awarded to Brazil, while Bolivia received a portion of the
left bank of the upper Acre. The boundary between Bolivia and Perú is as
yet undecided. The latter country includes the uppermost left bank of the
source section which contains but few fine rubber trees.

[Illustration: DR. CARLOS DE CERQUEIRA PINTO,

Inventor of a Smokeless Process for Curing Rubber.]

[Illustration: LANDSCAPE ON THE BANKS OF THE ALTO ACRE.]

The Acre is a right affluent of the larger tributaries of the Purús,
entering above the mouth of the Rio Negro and coming from the Southwest,
and flows, like these, through the boundless forest tracts of the Amazon
River country. It rises in elevated ground, East of the Andes, in a
still partly explored territory, very difficult of access, at about
the eleventh degree of southern latitude and 70½ longitude and flows
at first eastward, to the Bolivian boundary at 69°. From this point,
the Acre flows first Northeast, with a constantly increasing northerly
inclination, until it enters the Central Purús at 8⅔ South latitude and
67½ longitude. The small steamers run from this point to the junction
with the Amazon and on to Manáos in six to eight days.

In November more than 40 large and small steamers are despatched from
Pará and Manáos. They carry supplies for the rubber district and load,
for the return trip, fine rubber and other caoutchouc varieties. Such
steamers have, as a rule, a cargo capacity of 100 to 300 tons. The
largest, taking as much as 500 tons, are at most 50 to 60 meters in
length.

The journey from Manáos to the Purús, is usually accomplished in one day.
The Purús is a stately river, which, in its lower reaches often attains
a breadth of 1,000 meters and although it gradually narrows, it always
retains, until its confluence with the Acre, a breadth of several hundred
meters.

The trip to that point takes, as a rule, 12 to 16 days and except for the
last stretch of about three days, is open all the year. Here is the place
called Cochoeiras, where there are rapids, which during the dry season of
about four months, obstruct steam navigation on the Purús. The Acre, on
the other hand, has a narrow but deep bed, is rarely over 100 meters wide
and often contracts to 50 to 60 meters. In the dense forests, there may
be seen, from time to time, clearings on the banks with the =Baracâos=
that are the stations for the fine rubber business. Also occasional
larger places of residence, villages and little towns, where longer stops
are often made, are encountered.

We first pass Antimary, at the mouth of a river similarly named. Then we
soon reach Porto de Acre, a large residential place, where the steamers
must have their papers passed and pay duties.

This is the beginning of the Federal territory, which is separate from
the State of Amazonas and is subject to the central government in Rio
de Janeiro. Hardly a day’s journey up stream lies the little town of
Empreza, with its picturesque houses embowered in foliage. It is the most
important place on the lower Acre and the second largest residential town
in Acre Territory.

About three days’ journey up the river the town of Hapury is reached,
which contains several thousand inhabitants and enjoys a considerable
trade. It is the largest and most important town in the entire Acre
territory.

[Illustration: ON THE LOWER ACRE.]

When at times in the river’s narrow water course there are a dozen
large steamers lying and a lively business intercourse is everywhere in
progress, the scene, in the depth of the primeval forest, creates quite
an imposing impression. Hapury is considered already in the district of
Alta Acre and from this point, the difficulty of navigation increases,
the breadth and volume of water of the river alike decreasing. Very
rapidly during long, rainless periods, the river water level lowers
and the further progress of the steamers becomes impossible. They must
anchor at a convenient place and wait until the river rises again. In
lower Acre, where water is more plentiful, such interruptions are less
frequent, but in upper Acre they are the rule. The farther the river is
ascended the more frequent are these compulsory stoppages, often lasting
eight to fourteen days. High-water in the river often lasts but a few
days, so that the steamers must stop again. Then too, the many windings
of the river make navigation exceedingly difficult. On the upper Acre
travel is by day only, boats laying to at night.

Following the course of the river, 85 kilometers above Hapury, Igarapé
de Bahia is reached, on the Bolivian border and then the little town of
Cobija. It is situated on the right bank and belongs to Bolivia, whereas
on the left bank, Brazilian territory continues. The steamers here are
subject to the Bolivian customs regulations and must pay duty on all
goods destined for Bolivia.

A large number of the steamers that start from Manáos, go only as far as
this or as Hapury, only a few venture to penetrate further and are not
deterred by the great loss of time.

Above Cobija are some of the most productive rubber sections where there
are goods to discharge and rubber to be loaded. A few steamers follow
the Bolivian border up to the terminal station, Tacna. Here, as a small
affluent from the right, the Taverija flows into the Acre, forming at the
same time the boundary between Bolivia and Perú.

Bolivia maintains here a small military post, whereas there is only a
commissioner for Perú. If the steamer has met with favorable conditions,
the trip from Manáos may have been made in a month; ordinarily, however,
it takes two or three months. The return trip is made much faster, some
steamers, that do not stop, make Manáos from upper Acre in fourteen days.

Above Tacna there are but two rubber forest districts or seringaes as
they are termed, the Seringal Auristella on the Peruvian side and the
Seringal St. Francisco on the Brazilian side. The latter is a very
productive and still young rubber forest, farther up the river the fine
rubber trees suddenly cease and their output is no longer remunerative.

[Illustration: RUBBER TREE AT HAPURY.]

The climate, like that of the Amazon country, is humid and hot, with
a rainy and a dry season. The southerly situation, however, causes a
somewhat more marked difference between the two seasons. In April, the
rains become less frequent and then, until October, there are no or but
very few heavy precipitations; some times the fallen leaves on the ground
in the woods are dried out and even the dew is absent. There then occur,
however, especially in the months of June, July and August, steady cold
spells, when the thermometer, in the morning, sinks to 8° C. and often
does not go above 12° C. during the day. These so-called =Friazens= last
several days and are recurrent, but cease in September. Thunder storms
and violent rain storms begin in October, so that in November the rivers
are usually navigable again. In December the first steamships arrive. In
January and February a rainless period is frequent, which is followed, in
March and April again, by a rainy spell. Many steamers undertake, usually
at this time, their second voyage and if they have good fortune they make
three trips to upper Acre.

The copious precipitation, the heat and the fertile soil have produced
in Acre a luxuriant primeval forest, which is higher and more densely
overgrown than that of the lower river courses of the Amazon country.
Trees of 40 to 50 meters in height are not infrequent, they form a forest
of varied composition. There may be found here representatives of the
most diverse plant families; some of which, in the cool season, lose
their foliage. The forest is densely overgrown with plants, shoots and
shrubs. Where a thorny growth, Tapoea and other underbrush gets the upper
hand, a macheté or axe is necessary in forcing a path through the virgin
forest.

Various kinds of trees are used by the natives for building houses,
fashioning canoes and other purposes. For export, however, neither these
useful woods nor many other products of the forest, have attained any
importance. The fruit of the cacao tree and Pará nuts, rot on the ground,
transportation to Manáos being too costly. The caoutchouc products are,
however, present in such abundance and possess such great value, that
their acquisition and transportation recompenses every effort and have
been the cause of the development in these distant primeval forests of a
busy life.

The water in the deeply hollowed bed of the Acre, swells in flood time
and submerges the land on the adjacent shores and some sand banks, but
for the most part does not penetrate into the forest or only for a short
period. The flooded forests of the lower water courses, often miles in
extent, are lacking and the fine rubber trees grown on land free from
inundation, often reaches up into the hills in the hilly or mountainous
district.

[Illustration: JUNCTION OF THE ACRE RIVER WITH THE PURÚS.]

The fine rubber tree belongs to the Hevea brasiliensis, Mull. Arg. or to
their near families. It is higher and more vigorous than the trees in
the inundated districts and has somewhat larger and longer seeds. Trees
of more than 40 meters in height and up to five meters in circumference,
are not rare. Whether the Acre fine rubber tree is a special species
or a variety of Hevea Braziliensis, can be determined only by a very
painstaking investigation. In yield of rubber and quality of product, the
Acre tree surpasses that of the inundated districts.

Of other Hevea varieties Hevea cuneata Hub. the Seringa vermelha, occurs
but rarely, also sapium tapurú, Ule, is found but rarely. Castillôa Ulei,
Warb., the “caucho” of the Peruvians, is quite plentiful and is generally
utilized, its exploitation being regarded sometimes as more profitable
than the fine rubber. Just as in the Amazon country, under the title
“caoutchouc,” the product of castillôa is mainly understood, so, in Acre,
for the yield of the Hevea, the name “fine rubber” is used.

At present, there are on the Acre no unowned, unused lands, but some of
the seringaes in operation are capable of further development. In lower
Acre there are many seringaes that are badly exhausted and furnish but a
small yield. The rubber collectors too, who, as is well-known, cut down
the Castillôa trees, are compelled to go further into upper Acre all the
time to find profitable work.

Acre territory is regarded as the most productive fine rubber section,
especially on its borders; on the little river Hapury and towards the
Taurumano, which belongs to the water-shed of the Madeira, the output is
said to be exceedingly rich. In proportion to their longitudinal extent,
the extent of the woods belonging to Acre, in breadth, is comparatively
small, for in a one or two days’ journey, it is possible to reach the
district of another river. The rubber forest properties are consequently
all measured from the river and include usually, a territory of several
hundred square kilometers, often in fact, equal to small principalities.
Many owners have also several seringaes, often in Bolivia and Brazil
simultaneously.

In such a seringal on the river bank, the dwelling with warehouse
accommodations and sales-place, is erected, known as the Baracâo in
contradistinction to the small Baraken of the work people.

About the Baracâo the forest is usually cleared to afford land for
planting and pasture for the cattle.

The management of the seringal and its entire business, proceeds from the
Baracâo. According to the extent of the seringal, from twenty to several
hundred work people are employed on it. Through the entire forest, paths,
known as =estradas=, are laid out, from which all obstructive brush and
hanging creepers, are cut away with the macheté. These =estradas=, where
possible, are laid out in loops, so that they lead back to the starting
point and are so planned as to include from 100 to 150 fine rubber trees.

[Illustration: SERINGAL WITH THE RUBBER ON THE ALTO ACRE.]

Every seringueiro is allotted two or three =estradas= to work. These
seringueiros live in the interior of the forest in special =baraken=,
either with their families, or usually several together. The different
=baraken= are connected by broader roads that can be traversed by mules.

In May or June, after the =estradas= have previously been put in order,
the gathering of fine rubber commences. The seringueiro proceeds in the
early morning into the forest, taps the trees in the customary manner
with the little axe Maschadi, attaches the tin cups and afterwards
collects the accumulated milk. It is afternoon when he reaches home with
the milk he has collected in a rubber bag or in tin cans, to be smoked.
In a little hut, roofed with palm-straw, the smoking is proceeded with.
Pieces of wood that give a copious smoke are burned and over the fire
is placed a tin cylinder, known as a =Boião=. The seringueiro first
collects, in the middle of a round, strong stick, some coagulated rubber
milk and pours the still fluid milk, which he has in a large tin dish,
over this place, turning the stick so that the smoke can impregnate the
coagulating caoutchouc. He continues this operation until the milk in the
tin pan is all used up.

By this means, a rubber ball is produced which is enlarged in the
succeeding days until it weighs about 50 kilos. The stick is then
withdrawn and the ball, stored with others, until the mule train
comes for it. A mule can carry on each side of him 50 kilos without
over-exerting himself.

If, however, the weight of the ball exceeds sixty kilos, the mules are
overloaded and the seringueiro who made the balls pays a fine. Where the
dwelling place of the seringueiro is near a river and the fine rubber can
be transported by canoe, larger balls, that often weigh more than 100
kilos are made.

This gathering and preparation of the fine rubber differs materially
from that practiced on the lower water courses where the milk is smoked
with much greater care, on the shovel shaped mould and the balls, as a
rule, weigh but 10 to 30 kilos. On the Acre, the seringueiro will gather
in a day 15 to 25 liters of milk, which will yield 7 to 12 kilos of dry
rubber, whereas in the inundated section he will be able to gather but
one-half or one-third as much. Of course the seringueiro can smoke the
milk much more carefully and take certain precautions, as for instance,
that the rubber-milk is never heated. On the Acre on the other hand, the
milk is warmed as a rule, because otherwise the large mass is difficult
to manage. There is no question but that in this manner the quality of
the rubber, which is prepared from the best material and certainly would
yield the best product, suffers. Nevertheless the rubber balls from Acre,
prepared in the primitive manner, furnish a good and much sought for
rubber. The tapping of the trees also is often effected with less care,
small steel axes being used that make wounds that are too deep and as a
result, the seringaes in the Acre are exhausted more quickly than those
in the inundated district.

[Illustration: A HUT ON THE UPPER ACRE IN WHICH RUBBER IS SMOKED.]

From the =baracâos=, the stations on the banks of the river, small mule
trains proceed to the interior to bring in the rubber balls, which are
laid in rows, usually in the open air, so that they will be thoroughly
dried before loading them on the steamer. By the same mules, food and
supplies are sent to the seringueiros in the forest. When the rubber
gathering ceases in December or January, the seringueiro has other
important work to do. Roads must be opened and repaired, clearings made
in the forest, huts erected, wood cut and finally the paths set in order
for the approaching harvest. During the rainy season, the steamer brings
new supplies and food, which the seringueiro must buy at the =Baracâo=.

Concerning the duties the seringueiro has to perform, there are special
regulations, which prevail in most seringaes and of which written or
printed copies are often furnished.

To each seringueiro is allotted two or three estradas, each with 120
to 200 trees. For this he pays 15 per cent of his gathering of fine
rubber to the owner of the forest and an additional 10 per cent if he
uses the mules for transportation. The remaining rubber belongs to the
seringueiro in so far as he does not have to pay it for goods purchased.
As a rule, the owner purchases a portion of the product on the spot at
a price that is, of course, somewhat lower than is paid in Manáos, the
remaining portion is shipped, for account of the seringueiro, to Pará
and Manáos, and he receives the full market price for it, of course,
after deducting freight and duties. The balance is placed to the credit
of the seringueiro and paid to the firm representing the owner in Manáos
or Pará. Certain items, for instance, the price of Sernamby, consisting
of residual scraps of rubber, the seringueiro also receives in Acre. In
some cases payments are made in rubber products, a form of payment quite
common in other transactions.

On the upper Acre, a seringueiro will usually collect in a day as much
milk as will yield from 6 to 15 kilos of fine rubber. Two liters of this
milk yield a kilo of dry rubber, whereas with Manihot Glaziovi, 3 liters
are required for this. Exceptional cases occur where the seringueiro
furnishes milk for 20 to 25 kilos of fine rubber in one day. Daily
collections of more than 40 liters, however, a single worker can hardly
control and he must then have an assistant for carrying and smoking. The
yearly production of a seringueiro amounts, in the better rubber forest
properties, to upwards of 1,000 kilos of dry rubber.

[Illustration: RUBBER TREE OF NEARLY FIVE METERS IN CIRCUMFERENCE.]

Some owners offer a reward, such as for instance, a gold watch, for the
most industrious and luckiest seringueiro. On the Seringal S. Francisco,
for the crop year 1911-1912, a seringueiro won the gold watch who had
collected 2,500 kilos. The annual highest yield of caoutchouc from
the Castillôa was only 1,700 kilos, for the forest there in regard to
Castillôa is already very much exhausted. Otherwise the yields of this
rubber are more variable and higher than those of fine rubber.

If the price of rubber rules high, a seringueiro has quite a considerable
income and with a little frugality can acquire a property.

If, on the other hand, the price of rubber drops below five milreis, the
seringueiro has trouble to make both ends meet with his income and easily
gets into debt. The supplies that he must purchase from the proprietor
or his representative (lessee) are very expensive. The customs duties,
the long haul and consequently high freight, the risk, the different
losses, which the proprietor suffers through debtor workmen, and the
occasional high price of fine rubber, which forces all prices upward,
makes everything in upper Acre very dear.

The prices of some of the most necessary supplies and goods are about as
follows.

    1 kilo mandioka flour, 2½ milreis.
    1 kilo coffee, 4 milreis.
    1 kilo sugar, 3 milreis.
    1 kilo beans, 3 milreis.
    1 kilo rice, 2½ milreis.
    1 kilo dried meat, 5 milreis.
    1 kilo fresh meat, 4 milreis.
    1 chicken, 30 milreis.
    1 dozen eggs, 10 milreis.
    1 bottle brandy, 8 milreis.
    1 meter goods, 3 to 6 milreis.
    1 woolen quilt, 120 to 140 milreis.
    1 pair boots, 40 to 60 milreis.
    1 cake washing soap, 3½ milreis.
    1 piece fine soap, 5 milreis.
    1 macheté, 14 to 22 milreis.
    1 package matches, 3 milreis.
    1 carbine, 200 milreis.
    1 kilo powder, 28 milreis.
    1 kilo shot, 4 milreis.

[Illustration: THE MOUTH OF THE ACRE.]

1 pound sterling is now worth about 15 milreis, so that four shillings
(about one dollar U. S.)=3 milreis.

On the lower Acre, goods are much cheaper and they fall still lower down
to Manáos, where many articles only cost one-third or one-fourth as much,
or even less, but Manáos is nevertheless an expensive city.

The large profits which fine rubber often yields, make all labor very
dear. For this reason agriculture has developed but slowly and most food
supplies must therefore be imported. Nevertheless cattle raising is
constantly growing, stock being brought in from Bolivia. Bananas, the
tubers of the sweet mandiola, beans and some vegetables are extensively
grown, especially by Peruvians and Bolivians. Often the seringueiro will
plant some bananas and cultivate a small patch of cleared land, but this
is not favorably regarded by the proprietor. In some seringaes, even the
marriage of the seringueiros is opposed; everything is directed towards
obtaining the largest possible quantity of fine rubber.

Although the Acre is not very full of fish, fishing, in the dry season,
is attended with some success, which particularly benefits dwellers
on the banks of the river. Hunting also, in some sections, furnishes
residents with fresh meat. As animals of the chase may be enumerated,
monkeys, Taca, Aguti, wild swine, small varieties of deer, sloths,
tapirs, various wood fowl and ducks.

Very different from the arrangements customary, as a rule, in the Acre,
are the conditions in the Bolivian rubber districts, which for the most
part are owned by a single proprietor, N. Suarez y Hermanos. He is said
to produce 1,500 tons of fine rubber per year, and could produce more
than four times the quantity if the entire forest concession, which
is probably as large as South Germany, was all put in operation. One
portion of this rubber forest is situated on the Acre, but the greater
part includes the Southwestern tributaries of the Rio Madeira. In the
properties on the Acre, the working methods are adapted to Brazilian
customs, especially where Brazilian seringueiros are employed.

While in the Seringaes, trade is conducted mostly through the Baracâos,
there are in some places, notably in Cobija, Hapury and Empreza, various
business houses, through which the owners of seringaes, captains of
ships and other persons, can supply their wants, for before the steamer
returns, there is often a scarcity in some products.

[Illustration: THE ACRE SEEN FROM COBIJA ON THE BOLIVIAN FRONTIER.]

The retail trade is mainly in the hands of so-called Turks, various
Orientals, from Syria, Arabia, Tunis and Morocco. They have large boats,
propelled by poles and oars and which contain the goods in a covered
space. These Turks travel as pedlars for years about on the rivers,
selling their goods for money or rubber. This commerce is designated
=Regatao= and is not favored by proprietors, who sometimes forbid
stopping in their territory. The seringueiro can not only buy cheaper of
them, but can dispose of caoutchouc surreptitiously.

Those who encounter favorable conditions on the Acre, who are diligent
and economical, can, by working in the rubber industry, or in any other
field of activity, soon acquire a property. The majority, however,
squander their earnings on trips to Manáos, Pará or Ceará, or suffer from
sickness.

Although hygienic conditions on the Acre have improved with the times
and there are numerous healthy localities, malaria still prevails there
a great deal, and other diseases, notably beriberi, are often fatally
prevalent. Many privations, caused by the difficulties of travel, and
a certain amount of luxury, made possible by the large earnings, often
contrast with one another.

From Acre, during the year, about 5,000 tons of fine rubber, inclusive of
other rubber products, are exported, of which certainly a portion comes
from the adjacent territory.

This quantity, according to the price of rubber, will represent a value
of 20,000 to 75,000 contos of réis, about $5,000,000 to $15,000,000.
These are figures that play a part in the total output of rubber, the
importance of which is increased by its quality.


THE ACRE TERRITORY.

Previous to the Treaty of Petropolis, in 1903, between Brazil and
Bolivia, the Acre Territory formed part of the State of Amazonas, one
portion being, in fact, still in dispute. By virtue of this treaty the
Acre Territory became Brazilian, Brazil in exchange paying £2,000,000
to Bolivia, an indemnity to an American syndicate, and undertaking to
construct the Madeira Mamoré Railway.

The Congress then empowered the Federal authorities to administer the
Territory until the question should be finally settled.

The administration is much the same as that of the other States. Recent
laws have tended to decentralize the administration, the latest being one
giving municipal independence. The three provinces of the Territory are:

    Upper Purús (capital Senna Madureira),
    Upper Juruá (capital Cruzeiro do Sul), and
    Upper Acre (capital Empreza).

[Illustration: TRANSPORT OF RUBBER BISCUITS.]

The only product and export is rubber, the proportions during 1911 being:

    Upper Purús  4,042,000 kilos
    Upper Juruá  3,008,000 kilos
    Upper Acre   3,526,000 kilos

One of the most serious questions has been that relating to the ownership
of land. The Federal Congress is prepared to solve this problem
satisfactorily, by recognizing bona-fide holdings dating from before the
Treaty of Petropolis, giving preference to property deeds granted by the
State of Amazonas, next to those given by the Republic of Bolivia during
its brief occupation, and then to any possession obtained in good faith
during the whole interregnum, up to the date of the last law passed.


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

For the protection of Brazilian rubber, and in order to facilitate and
develop its culture, as well as its final handling, a Federal law was
passed on January 5th of the current year. (No. 2513 A.)

Its principal measures are especially concerned with Amazon rubber and
the country in which it is produced, viz.: the States of Amazonas and
Matto-Grosso and the Acre Territory. The scheme embraces the construction
of railways and roads, the clearing of rivers, reduction of import duties
and of dues on river navigation, the establishing of coal depots, living
accommodation for laborers, centres for the production of foodstuff,
model cattle farms, prizes to rubber planters and exemption from import
duties on all material for rubber working.

Besides the Madeira Mamoré Railway, which benefits principally the
Madeira River district of Matto-Grosso, and a further branch of the same
railway, now in course of construction, and which is intended to open
up the Bolivian district of the Beni River, the Brazilian Government
will construct another railroad (in the route of which the Commercial
Association has suggested some alterations) to commence from Manáos and
to work through the region of the Rio Branco, to link up with the English
railroad already constructed in British Guiana up to the Brazilian
boundary. This railway will open up to the State of Amazonas a huge
tract of country admirably suited to agriculture of all kinds, and to
colonization by Europeans.

The Association Commercial will also propose the construction of a
further railroad to communicate by means of branch lines with the various
provinces of the Acre Territory, in order to bring the product of that
region to the lower Purús River, at a point which will admit of free
access to steamers of deep draft to and from Manáos.

[Illustration: THE UPPER ACRE SEEN FROM PATAGONIA.]


DR. CERQUEIRA PINTO’S PROCESS


EXTRA FINE PARÁ

This rubber was cured for export in the rubber estate “IRACEMA,” in the
Federal Acre, Amazonia, Brazil, by Dr. Cerqueira Pinto’s process of
smokeless coagulation. (See The India Rubber World, August 1, 1909, page
396, and copy of the same journal of 1st September, the same year, page
435.)

The enclosed sample contains 68 kilos and belongs to the lot of 5,000
kilos (11,025 lbs.) that Dr. Cerqueira Pinto holds to be sold in New York.

Dr. Cerqueira Pinto’s process is one of coagulation of the latex of
the “=Hevea Brasiliensis=” by an ingredient patented by the Brazilian
Government—“=LACTINA=”—absolutely free of any acid.

The latex after the coagulation is pressed through a cylinder in order to
dry out.

This rubber was tested and classified as of STANDARD type by the
Government of the United States of America.

It offers the resistance of 2,010 pounds per square inch according to
the experiments made by The Manhattan Rubber Company in July, 1909. This
rubber means a saving to the manufacturer of at least 20 per cent, in the
opinion of the Favorite Rubber Mfg. Co. of New Jersey and of 25 per cent,
as per the analysis made in London.

The author of this process calls the Jury’s attention to his rubbers and
is willing to furnish with the sufficient quantity in order to prove to
the entire satisfaction of his assertions. It vulcanizes as well by acid
as by vapor. Dr. Cerqueira Pinto will prepare, during the Exposition,
in September, before the public and the manufacturers, his rubbers with
both Hevea and Castillôa latexes, yield of the trees in October, 1911,
in the Federal Acre, Brazil. He shall present as well a large quantity
of similar rubbers cured by the author on different occasions. They are
true rubbers of commerce cured for export. They are clothed by a vegetal
varnish, soluble in water, which is also a discovery of Dr. Cerqueira
Pinto, to prevent the mould.


CASTILLÔA OR CAUCHO.

Prepared by the process of Dr. Carlos de Cerqueira Pinto. (See the India
Rubber World of September 1st, 1909, page 435).

The included sample weighs 68 kilos. The author holds 1,400 pounds of
this quality to be sold in New York market.

The article was cured by rubber laborers of the estate “Iracema” in the
Federal Acre, Amazonia, Brazil, during the months of July to December,
1911. They are rubbers of commerce and cured for export.

[Illustration: COURTYARD OF THE SETTLEMENT OF THE MESSRS. SUAREZ Y
HERMANOS, FILLED WITH RUBBER BISCUITS READY FOR SHIPMENT.]

[Illustration: THE TOWN OF HAPURY.]

[Illustration: SETTLEMENT OF PORTO AUCAO WITH MULES CARRYING MERCHANDISE
TO THE INTERIOR.]

[Illustration: SETTLEMENT OF MONTE MO.]

[Illustration: SERINGUEIRO CARRYING LATEX.]




THE STATE OF MATTO GROSSO

[Illustration: BALLS OF RUBBER.]




THE STATE OF MATTO GROSSO IN THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL RUBBER EXPOSITION IN
NEW YORK, 1912

BY LEOPOLDO DE MATTOS

Dr. Joaquim Augusto da Costa Marques, President of the State of Matto
Grosso, 1911-1915

The State of Matto Grosso, Brazil, at the Third International Rubber
Exposition in New York, 1912


Of the twenty states composing the Republic of the United States of
Brazil, Matto Grosso is second to the largest in its territorial
extension. It is situated south of the States Amazon and Pará, having
on the East the States of Goyaz, S. Paulo and Paraná, on the South the
Republic of Paraguay, and on the West Bolivia.

It embraces on the map that portion of the earth’s surface which
extends, approximately from the fourth degree South of the Equator
to the Tropic of Capricorn. Its immense area is about 50,175 square
leagues, or according to Mr. Candido Mendes it has an area of 1,379,651
square meters. Its population is actually about 350,000, not including
a considerable number of uncivilized Indians, whose improvement is
carried steadily forward by the united efforts of the State and Federal
Governments.

Without mentioning its capital, the principal cities of the State are
Corumbá, S. Luiz de Caceres, Miranda, Nioae, Focoué, Santa Aunade
Paranabyba, Diamantina, Rosario, Livramento, and the new and recently
incorporated municipality, S. Antonio de Rio Madeira. Its capital,
Cuyabá, is situated on the left bank of the river of the same name, 288
meters above sea level, and owes its origin to the Paulistas, who formed
colonies in the western part of Brazil during the first part of the
Eighteenth Century.

In 1719 Paschoal Moreira Cabral ascending the River Coxipé Mirim, founded
on the left bank of this stream a village which was called Forquilha,
but to-day is the city of Cuyabá, where in those early days a rich gold
mine was discovered. In those days, according to Elysée Reclus, the vast
region of Matto Grosso, was hardly anything except a narrow, ordinary
zone, nothing more than an immense solitude of undefined limits and
unknown, but given over to Indians and wild beasts. It was joined to the
rest of Brazil by the lonely paths of hunters, and by channels of the
rivers that had their origin there. Really in those days communication
with the remainder of Brazil was as difficult as with Matto Grosso. It
is within the memory of many and known to those who read the history
of Brazil, that it was impossible for the troops who were enrolled and
equipped in the coast provinces, to go directly to the aid of their
compatriots in Matto Grosso, when the Brazilian people had to respond to
the declaration of war by Paraguay.

With the thousands of obstructions in their path, a portion of the army
composed of 3,000 men, which left Rio de Janeiro in April, 1865, and
which could only be organized in Uberaba, in the upper basin of Paraná,
was reduced to about 700, when it arrived at that safe and impregnable
place.

The war with Paraguay being ended, there is no doubt that the victory
gained by Brazil opened wide the ports of Matto Grosso, for the natural
declivity of the soil, the course of the streams, with the free river
navigation, guaranteed by her triumph, established a regular line of
packets between Rio de Janeiro, Corumbá and Cuyabá, by way of the River
La Plata, passing by Montevideo, Buenos Ayres and Assumption.

The fluvial ways of the Guaporé, Madeira and Amazon were constantly
used in the Eighteenth Century, after the exploration made by Manoel de
Lima in 1742. Navigation by the Guaporé river to the Madeira, in short
to S. Antonio, which is the initial point of navigation on this last
mentioned river, is long and full of difficulties. Withal, Matto Grosso
is gradually approaching the coasts of Brazil by means of railroads,
such as the Northwestern Road, which will shortly unite it with Rio de
Janeiro, and the railroad, already projected, which, parting from S. Luiz
de Caceres, will reach the old city of Matto Grosso, where the Guaporé
begins to be navigable, to Guajará-Mirim, the terminal point of the great
Madeira-Mamoré Railway.

In a short time, as can readily be seen, these roads will be a reality,
the navigable rivers being united by the stretches of railroads between
them. The Paranápanema and the Ivahy in the States of Paraná and S.
Paulo, continue on the one side of the Paraná River, ascending the
Ivanhema, and the Brilhante, as far as the neighboring mountains of
Miranda, in the meridional part of Matto Grosso.

[Illustration: RUBBER FROM JACY PARANÁ OF FIDEL BACA & CO. READY TO BE
PUT IN BOATS TO BE TAKEN TO A STATION OF THE MADEIRA MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

The magnificent regions of Matto Grosso promise in the near future,
to be great centers of population and consequently a future focus of
civilization by probable fusion of the different elements of immigration,
which will certainly come together there in the flight of time, and the
increased facilities in the way of transportation. Somewhere it has been
said, that colonization without doubt will come from the South, from
Paraguay and Argentina; but at the present time, with the completion
of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway, undoubtedly colonization will also come
from the North, communication being facilitated by the Amazon River,
the Madeira being one of its tributaries, on the right bank of which is
situated Porto Velho, the initial point of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway.
These effects are already commencing to produce results as may be seen
from founding of a new municipality and district of Matto Grosso, called
the municipality of St. Antonio of the River Madeira, reached by the
above-mentioned railway and to which region we will devote a special
chapter later on.

Already one sees the farthest northern side of Matto Grosso filling with
people, while the southern side really contains the greater number of
inhabitants.

Matto Grosso is one of the regions of least roughness on the continent of
South America. There are no elevations of the land which constitute real
mountains.

The elevated lands have their points of culmination in the western
bases of the Mantiqueira, the Aymorés, and the Espinhaço, and continue,
gradually lowering from this side to the West of Goyaz, and on the other
side are the elevated lands at the base of the Andes, which incline to
the East with its supports. Elysée Reclus says that an intermediary
plain, separating the two geographical districts, goes winding in the
form of a valley, that in other ages certainly was a maritime strait
separating the two islands—Western Brazil and the Andes.

To-day rivers run in the depression where formerly there was a sea and
the plain is actually full of alluvial soil. The true center of South
America is between the two cities of Cuyabá and Corumbá.

To those who do not know the region, the slopes of the hills are mistaken
for mountains and geographical maps show a chain of mountains more or
less continuous, between the basins of the Tapajóz and the Madeira,
between the head waters of the same Tapajóz and Paraguay and finally
between the Tapajóz and the Araguaya. Nevertheless this semi-circular
plain exists only in fragments, because the elevations which are found
in the plains of the upper Paraguay and its tributaries are only a high,
level ground of horizontal sections or slight elevations and worn away by
the rivers which flow into the great Amazon.

[Illustration: REMOVING THE BALL OF RUBBER AFTER IT HAS BEEN SMOKED.]

They are rather tablelands than mountains, for they do not reach an
elevation, except in some parts of the tableland, of more than 100
meters, while the mean elevation of a range of mountains is 500 meters.

This geographic district in the State of Matto Grosso is indifferently
called the cordillara of Parecys, but does not present a mountainous
aspect except on the South side. On this scarred side, the rock is
cut into peaks, or cut away into obelisks. On the other side towards
the Tapajóz and Xingú, a long range extends and gradually declines
into the plains of the State of Amazonas. D’Orbiguy found in the high
northern part of Matto Grosso, the existence of beds pertaining to the
carboniferous age and corresponding to rocks of the same nature which
on the opposite side of that region are found in the Bolivian bases of
the Sierra of Santa Cruz. After this Hart and Derby verified the fact
that the southern parts of the Araxá, which are the elevated borders of
the tableland, date probably from paleozoic epochs, and there are found
the carboniferous, devonian and silurian beds. Fossil beds found by the
Geologist Smith below the hillocks of the plains, 50 kilometers east of
Cuyabá, place these facts beyond doubt. More to the North is the zone
of the rocky places, which in links cut the Madeira, Tapajóz, Xingú,
Tocatius and their tributaries, the walls denuded by erosion, are all
of the crystalline formation, granite, gueis, porphory and quartzite.
The elevations that unroll in the direction of the South, between the
sources of the Paraguay and Araguaya, following between the Paraguay and
the Paraná, do not present the same characteristics as the tablelands of
the North. The high parts of Western Matto Grosso were separated from
the East and West sides and devastated by lateral excavations, take in
certain places the aspects of true mountain chains, and for this reason
they are named, from the North to the South, the Sierras of S. Jeronimo,
Maracajú and Anhauhaly.

Eruptive rocks, called basaltic in this country, probably porphyritic
rend the beds of sandstone, of which the mountains are composed and
appear to form by their disintegration “red lands,” similar to those
which give the farmers of S. Paulo their abundant harvests of coffee.

In a sort of circle limited by a semicircle of elevations isolated
masses have been lifted up, rocks whose outlines, seen from a distance,
have a perfect regularity. The hills proper, for the greater part, have
geometrical forms, which it should be said, great forces have crumbled,
leaving smooth walls like the sides of pyramids. The tops of the
tablelands, as well as summits, have been maimed by a force certainly
corresponding to the other summits, which now may be seen as part of
the same prairie. According to Taunay, who traveled over the country,
these masses of sandstone in horizontal beds regularly placed one above
another, are formed of marshy sediment deposited by the sea of fresh
water, which in former times covered this region.

[Illustration: COLLECTING THE LATEX.]

The ruins of these hills and slopes contributed also to change the
physiognomy of the landscape. These excoriations were picked up and
dragged by the rivers, to form new beds and soil, and much rock
disappeared below the continued crumbling of the mountains. Others
show nothing except their summits above the land of recent formation.
Masses that held them to the tablelands and the chains of the interior
are separated from them, because their bases are buried and they emerge
abruptly from the soil. These distinctive peaks to which the name of
=itambea= has been given, raise their heads above a sea of trees, like
some great buildings erected by the hand of man. To the East, the
southern part of Matto Grosso, they range themselves in files and group
themselves in archipelagoes, each time becoming higher and more numerous.
The part that goes towards the West are solitary peaks on the circle of
the horizon and may be seen along the banks of the River Paraguay, and
even on the other side of the same.

The Upper Guaporé, Itenez of the Bolivians, although situated in the
immense basin of the Amazon as a tributary to the Madeira River by the
Mamoré, belongs to the State of Matto Grosso, for the city of this name
was founded on its banks and nearly the whole population of the state
accumulated in this depression, through whose western half the river
finds its way. Its principal source is very obscure. It rises in a grotto
along the border of the Araxá, and takes first a southerly course,
parallel to other rivers which descend towards Paraguay. On leaving the
last hills it curves to the West, and afterwards to the Northwest, where
already enlarged by numerous tributaries it crosses the plain, where
there is found the city named at its founding Villa Bella and to-day
called Matto Grosso.

The Paraguay is one of the most known rivers of South America, as a way
of navigation, as Elysée Reclus affirms. Few rivers have such a slight
declination in proportion to their length. Castelnaw says that it rises
at an altitude of 305 meters, in places where tranquil waters glide
slowly to the sea, the altitude of the land being scarcely 200 meters.
At a point 4,000 kilometers from the sea, the declination is scarcely 5
centimeters. Therefore, steamers of light draft can freely ascend to the
confines of Brazil, far to the North of the two Republics of Argentine
and Paraguay and arrive at the base of the tableland by the principal
river and its tributaries, Jaurú, Sepotuba, Cuyabá, S. Lourenço and
Taquary. The Paraguay presents another notable phenomenon, which is the
crossing its sources with those of the tributaries of the Amazon.

[Illustration: SMOKING RUBBER.]

The River Jaurú approaches the Guaporé so closely that it would be easy
to make a canal from the waters of this western river to a tributary
of the Jaurú. Another tributary of the Paraguay, the Aguapehy, is only
separated from the Alegre River, which flows by the old city of Villa
Bella, to-day called Matto Grosso, by a low and narrow isthmus, which
according to Leverger measures 5,280 meters. During 1772, and even later,
it was proposed to cut a canal at different places in this isthmus, but
the work was never done because of the little commerce of that locality.
Certainly, railroads, in the near future, will supply the absence of a
canal and will join Montevideo to Pará, passing through the larger part
of the State of Matto Grosso, and by a continental navigable water way of
8,300 kilometers, as Bartholomo Bossi says.

The Paraguay River has as its principal tributaries the S. Lourenço,
enlarged by the waters of the Cuyabá, the Taquary, the Mondego, and
the Apá, the last marking the boundary between Brazil and the Republic
of Paraguay. At the time of the floods, its level, and that of its
tributaries, rises 10 to 11 meters and overflows to the right and the
left, forming a temporary sea, which extends to great distances, being
lost to sight and continuing in lakes. The first Spanish explorers gave
it the name of Lake Xarayes, in its lower section, where it receives the
nearly dormant waters of its principal tributaries. This lake is about
600 kilometers in length from North to South, between the mouths of Jaurú
and the hills of “Fecho-dos-Morros,” and in certain places reaches a
width of 250 kilometers.

It is not permanent, as you already know, but at certain seasons of the
year there are overflows, which the Indians called bays and rightly, for
here there were bays of an ancient sea, which to-day are nearly dry,
and most of these lakes are in constant communication with the Paraguay
River, either by underground openings, or by long canals. These latter
are called the lakes of Uberaba, Gaiaba, Mandioré, Caceres, etc. Some
of these lakes contain only fresh water from the overflowing rivers,
while others being ancient cavities are now filled with salt water, and
have in their depths beds of salt, which give to the liquid a soapy
characteristic. It is singular that this contrast by nature of fresh and
salt water is also found in the lands of the vast plains, and thus it is,
that these extensive fields, covered by a rich alluvial soil, bear heavy
forests. Here the agriculturist can certainly obtain marvelous harvests.
It is certainly true that these fields of Matto Grosso will serve for
agriculture as well as pastoral industry.

The height of the lands, formed in the center of this vast valley,
hinders the tributary from remaining in a regular channel, and the waters
escaping from both sides ramify in a labyrinth of rivers and false
rivers. The lateral branches follow in the zones of the lakes, to the
confluence of the Taquary and Miranda Rivers, which descend from the
mountains on the East. These receive in the upper region, a tributary
called the Coxim, which travelers consider one of the most picturesque
rivers of Brazil. It is curious to see, in some places, the waters of the
Coxim crowded between perpendicular walls 50 meters in height and the
small vessels floating on their bosom at the bottom of an opening not
more than 10 or 12 meters in width.


THE CLIMATE

The climate of Matto Grosso is relatively warm in the lower parts and
those overflowed by the high waters of the Paraguay and other rivers.
In the region of the tablelands the climate is cool and healthy. The
movement of the air columns is determined by the open passage way between
the Andes mountains and the highlands of Brazil, as well as in the center
of the South American continent, and are held by it. The warm winds,
coming from the region of the Amazon, are succeeded in the Winter time
by the winds which blow from the cool pampas. In the high parts of the
circle of hills and mountains which surround the tablelands of Matto
Grosso, the cold goes below the freezing point. The copious rains brought
by the cooling winds refresh the central tablelands of Brazil and then
dash themselves against the sides of the Andes. They fall with great
regularity in the Summer and are frequently accompanied by thunderstorms.
According to observations taken by some, the annual fall of water is 3
meters, and in Cuyabá about 135 days of the ordinary year are rainy ones.


ITS SITUATION

The State of Matto Grosso, from its geographical situation in the
Continent of South America, placed at the point of separation of the
two great basins of Brazil, contains at the same time the flowers and
faunae of the Amazon and Plata regions. Nevertheless, the tropical flora
predominates with its infinite variety of vegetable forms in all the
forest regions, that is to say, along the banks of the rivers, and among
the famous species found along the shores of the River-Sea, there are few
which are not found in the region of the Upper Guaporé, and specimens of
which may not be seen.

In no other parts, like here, will the development of Cipo’s palm be
found. In 1875, a boundary commission discovered one of these palms
=Urumbamba (Calamus procumbeus) or Des Moncus rudentum de Martins=, of
more than 20 meters in length, with hardly the thickness of a centimeter.
The cotton tree, tobacco, ipecac, there called “poya,” grow spontaneously
on the plains and in the forests. The last grows abundantly in the
forests of the Upper Jaurú and the neighboring rivers. Maté, the most
notable product of the tablelands of the South, and which has made some
regions rich, as the State of Paraná, grows here spontaneously between
the Rivers Miranda and Apá, without speaking of the seringa, which is
found in immense and thick forests in a district that extends from Cuyabá
to Madeira and which will be the special subject of this leaflet.

The woods for building are very abundant and of a great variety, such as
Brazil wood, Jacarandá, Peroba, Canella, Cedro, Jequitibá, Massaran-duba,
Arco, Ferro, Setim and Vinhatico.

Among the animals are found deer, tapir, panther, and also a large number
of small animals usually found in tropical regions. The fowls and birds
along the streams and the songsters in the forests are, because of their
variety, almost innumerable. The ostrich is found in the region of the
pampas and on the margins of the upper Paraguay. There are many varieties
of fish in the large and small rivers.

In the mineral kingdom, the State of Matto Grosso has numerous mines
of gold, silver, platinum, copper, tin, mercury, coal, iron, precious
stones, diamonds, etc. There are already four English companies
developing gold mines. There is also granite, crystal, malacacheta,
limestone, sal-geunna, etc. Finally, in the region of the Araxá, there
are sulphur mineral springs.

In Matto Grosso are found the largest cattle ranches, not only as to
their territorial extent, but also as to the number of horses and cattle,
some of them numbering 100,000 head. The number of cattle is calculated
to be 2,000,500,000 head. Although the transportation of cattle from
Matto Grosso to Rio de Janeiro is difficult, it is generally done by
a road running West to Uberaba, where they pass the Winter season of
two or three months and being recuperated are sent by railroad to Rio
de Janeiro. Hence it is easy to see that with the completion of the
Northwestern Railway of Brazil, the problem of transportation to the
coast will be solved. Also with the completion of the Madeira-Mamoré
Railway the navigable rivers of Matto Grosso, will in short time, be
linked with the port of Pará. Before long another railway will extend
from S. Luiz de Caceres, the ancient city of Matto Grosso, where the
River Guaporé commences to be navigable to Guajará-Mirim, the terminal
point of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway. This will solve the problem of the
transportation of cattle to the States of Amazonas, Pará, etc.

[Illustration: RUBBER BEING SHIPPED ON MADEIRA-MAMORÉ RAILWAY AT THE
ESTATES OF FIDEL BACA & CO., JACY PARANÁ RIVER]

From this brief exposition one concludes that the State of Matto Grosso
is very rich in cattle and gold, diamonds and coffee, tobacco and maté,
rubber and ipecac, and all other products of the tropical and temperate
zone. Without doubt it will come to be one of the largest and richest
empires of the world.

Endowed with a warm climate in the North, it has in other regions
a temperate and even cold climate. The tablelands contain a rare
accumulation of wealth, yet little explored. Naturally people, in their
activities and progressive conflict for a livelihood, will come here from
all parts of the world. By their intelligence and endeavors they will
make that part of Brazil an industrial, commercial and maritime mart.
Here from the fusion of the different races, a great civilization will
arise, and mankind will progress onward and upward to the final conquest
of the land.


RUBBER

The rubber sent to this Exposition, comes from the vast regions served by
the Rivers Machados, or Dgy-Paraná, Jamary, Jacy-Paraná, Mutum-Paraná,
Paca-Nova and Guaporé and their tributaries, which in turn are
tributaries of the great Madeira River, on whose right bank is situated
the new municipality St. Antonio do Rio Madeira, installed July 2, 1912.

The new municipality has the following limits: Starting at the falls of
St. Antonio do Rio Madeira, on parallel 8° 48′, the River Madeira above;
the River Madeira above to the mouth of the Guaporé on parallel of 12°,
and on this parallel to its intersection with the River Camararé; on
this river below to its confluence with the Juruema; on this river below
to the point where it unites with the Arinos; on the parallel at this
point which passes to its intersection with S. Manuel River; it follows
this river down to its confluence with the Tapajóz; and from this point
back to St. Antonio Falls, along the line that divides Matto Grosso from
the Amazonas. All this immense territory of the new municipality is
traversed on the North by the Madeira-Mamoré Railway, which was completed
and opened for traffic, September 7, 1912. It starts at Porto Velho and
terminates at Guajará-Mirim, a distance of 390 kilometers.

The Madeira-Mamoré Railroad, in addition to the stations already opened
in Porto Velho, Candelaria, St. Antonio, Jacy-Paraná, Abunã, Villa
Murtinho, and Guajará-Mirim has 46 places of stopping, which corresponds
to the number of camps.

Among the ways of communication that St. Antonio do Rio Madeira, the
new municipality, has with the neighboring States of Amazonas and Pará,
as well as with the capital and other cities of Matto Grosso, we would
mention the telegraph line which the Federal Government is constructing
along with its public road ways. There are two gangs of engineers and
workmen engaged in the construction of the telegraph line. One started
at St. Antonio in the North, and the other at Diamantina in the South.
Leaving St. Antonio the telegraph line follows parallel 8° 48′ until it
comes to the River Jamary, a distance of about 60 kilometers. Arriving
there its course is changed to the headwaters of the Dgy-Paraná River,
to a place called Urupá. Here it will meet and be joined to the line
coming from the South. On June 3, 1912, at the very headwaters of the
Dgy-Paraná River, the telegraph station of José Bonifacio was opened,
by the gang from the South, while those from the North had, previous to
this, opened the stations of St. Antonio do Rio Madeira and Jamary. This
notable undertaking is under the efficient and extraordinary devotion
of the Colonel of Engineers of the Brazilian army, Candido Roudon, who
has a record for the construction of telegraph lines in Brazil and South
America.

Within a year, more or less, the telegraph line will follow along a
roadway 40 meters wide, and about 200 leagues in length, extending
from Cuyabá to St. Antonio on the Madeira River. This immense roadway
of communication cutting all this vast interior, rich in rubber and
gold, will have a telegraph station every 10 leagues. In Porto Velho,
the initial point of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway, there is already
working a wireless telegraph station of the Marconi system. There is
daily communication with Manáos. Also with Iquitos and with the Federal
department at Acre, Purús and Juruá.

Transportation from Manáos to St. Antonio on the Madeira River is made
in good condition and comfortable vessels. During the time of low water,
that is during the dry season of the great Amazon and its tributaries,
only vessels of 500 tons can ascend to those places from Manáos. In the
time of high waters, when the valley of the entire Amazon is overflowed,
the trans-Atlantic steamers of 7,000 to 9,000 tons, ascend in four days
from Manáos. This has been done in the transportation of materials for
the construction of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway. The vessels easily
approached and made fast to the two wharves made of wood, one of which
is in front of the offices at Porto Velho and the other at Candelaria.
The Government of the Republic, however, has determined to build of stone
and lime the wharves between Porto Velho and St. Antonio on the River
Madeira.

[Illustration: RUBBER ON THE BEACH READY FOR SHIPMENT.]

The small steamers which navigate during the dry season, have
accommodations for first and third class passengers, are lighted by
electricity, have an artificial ice plant and make the voyage from Manáos
to Porto Velho and St. Antonio in about five days, at the average speed
of ten miles an hour, calling at the small Amazonian ports and cities
situated on the banks of the Madeira River. In descending the river both
the large and small steamers make the voyage in from three to four days.

The rubber from St. Antonio on the Madeira River is of the same physical
and chemical constituents as all the rubber of the Amazon Valley. This is
worth remembering, when we think of this new municipality in the State of
Matto Grosso, being the frontier of the States of Amazonas and Pará.

In the Manáos market, where the rubber comes by way of the Madeira River,
and in that of Pará, which it reaches by way of River Tapajóz, it is
always quoted at the same price and under the same conditions as those
produced in the regions of the Amazon proper.

The production has been increasing annually since 1906 and is actually
about 2,000,000 of kilos annually. This will certainly increase to an
amount that cannot be foretold, with the completion of the Madeira-Mamoré
Railway, the wagon road and telegraph line and the constant improvements
in navigation.

During the first six months of the current year, the production of rubber
was greater than for the same length of time in any year since 1907, as
can be verified from the report annexed.

In those regions, between Cuyabá and the new municipality, there exist
rubber (seringa) forests capable of producing in one year, more than
40,000,000 of kilos of rubber.

To attain this ideal, it is only necessary that the captains of industry
should join in the development of extraction. This fountain shoots forth
from the earth spontaneously without the necessity of cultivation. To
encourage and stimulate those who wish to employ there, their endeavors
and capital, the law of the State of Matto Grosso offers special favors.
These are offered to those who wish to develop the vast forests of
rubber existing, as well as to those who wish to plant and cultivate the
=Syphonia elastica=.

Speaking of the Rubber Exposition soon to be held in New York, it
is proper to call attention to the well-known fact that already the
capitalists of North America have begun the development of that region.

The large capitalist, Percival Farquhar, of North America, has already
incorporated two rubber companies, the Muller and Guaporé, under the
social terms of July, for the purpose not only of developing the
extraction industry of the =hevea= braziliensis, but also for the
different branches of agriculture necessary for the making of sugar,
cotton cloth, etc.

Actually the extraction of rubber in the vast seringaes of the
municipality of St. Antonio of the River Madeira employ about 5,000
workmen. This number will constantly increase, as the said municipality
becomes the center of the currents of commerce, industry and agriculture,
from Matto Grosso and the Republic of Bolivia.

This is easy to imagine, when we see that the Madeira-Mamoré Railway
will place it in communication to the South with S. Luiz de Caceres, by
means of the River Guaporé, and by the railway, which, from S. Luiz de
Caceres will extend to the ancient city of Matto Grosso, thus joining the
basin of the Plata—by means of the Paraguay River, to the basin of the
River Amazon. And to the West the same Madeira-Mamoré Railway, reaching
to Ribeira-Alta, will bind the vast and rich regions of the Bolivian
Republic to the basin of the Amazon, by means of the Madeira River.
Presently the chief engineer and director of the Madeira-Mamoré Railway,
Mr. H. Dose, will leave for that region, to begin the construction of the
branch Guajará Mirim—Matto Grosso, to Ribeira Alta, Bolivia, which will
be finished within a year and a half, and be about 100 meters long.

In addition to this with the prompt construction within a year of the
wagon—telegraphic line—roadway from Cuyabá to St. Antonio on the Madeira
River, we can easily conclude, that the municipality of St. Antonio on
the Madeira River, will indeed become the converging point of these great
and strong currents of development of progress and of civilization.

In conclusion it should not be forgotten that this territory herein
described serves not only for the production of rubber, which there, as
in the whole valley of the Amazon, is native and grows according to the
laws of nature. It also should be mentioned that cacao and cotton are
native, while there can be planted and cultivated, sugar cane, coffee,
vanilla, corn, beans, rice, tobacco, potatoes, brazil nut, etc. The
Madeira-Mamoré Railway Company has the concession of a vast amount of
land along its line, which it proposes to plant in cacao, sugar cane,
etc., thus improving these lands.

From this description, in which we have endeavored to set forth only the
truth, giving the facts concerning the region in question, it can be
concluded that the new municipality of St. Antonio on the River Madeira,
which actually exports to the markets of the world, via Pará and Manáos,
about 2,000,000 kilos of rubber, will in a few years, with immigration
and from other causes, export from 10 to 15,000,000 kilos.

The author of this article asks indulgence for any shortcomings it may
contain, as it was written in the spare moments he could find, while
laboriously collecting the samples of rubber and putting them on board
the steamer at Manáos for New York.

[Illustration: PUTTING THE LAST LAYERS OF MILK ON THE BALL.]

The samples of rubber from the State of Matto Grosso, which are seen in
this International Rubber Exposition, have been exhibited by order of
the Government and at the expense of the Commercial Association of the
Amazonas.


STATE OF MATTO GROSSO

Inspection Department of the North

Table showing the production of rubber in the valleys of the Madeira and
upper Tapajóz, for the years 1907-1912, in comparison with the first six
months of 1912:

          Origin                            1907       1908       1909
    Machado and Jamary                   1,092,454  1,252,194    910,982
    Jacy-Paraná, Upper Madeira and Moré     98,464    152,713    150,759
    Upper Tapajóz                          156,034    167,841    107,458
                                         ---------  ---------  ---------
                                         1,190,918  1,560,941  1,229,582

          Origin                            1910       1911       1912
    Machado and Jamary                   1,295,605  1,317,917  1,315,995
    Jacy-Paraná, Upper Madeira and Moré    142,458    201,562    259,612
    Upper Tapajóz                           73,688    113,453
                                         ---------  ---------  ---------
                                         1,545,521  1,593,167  1,689,060

[Illustration: TAPPING THE RUBBER TREE.]


STATE OF MATTO-GROSSO

The capital, Cuyabá, and the principal port, Corumbá, belong to the
hydrographical system of the Paraguay River.

The boundaries of this State, formed by the Amazon River, embrace the
upper basin of the Madeira River, which as the result of an agreement
with the State of Amazonas appertains to Matto-Grosso, whereas it
previously belonged to the former State.

This territory constitutes the judicial and administrative province of
Santo Antonio do Madeira.

The executive and fiscal administration is entrusted to a Fiscal Delegate
in Manáos. The collection of duties is attended to by the State Customs
of Amazonas.

The rubber producing rivers, with total production of Matto-Grosso, are:

                             1908      1909      1910       1911
                             Kilos     Kilos     Kilos      Kilos
    Machado and Jamary    1,253,000  911,000  1,296,000  1,318,000
    Jacy Paraná, Upper
      Madeira & Mamoré      153,000  150,000    143,000    202,000

During the first half of the current year the production has shown
a considerable increase, this being largely due to the opening and
developing of the Madeira Mamoré Railway, which passes through the whole
region of these rivers.

[Illustration: BOATS GOING TO THE UPPER JACY PARANÁ RIVER TO GET RUBBER]

[Illustration: WALKING THROUGH THE FOREST ESTATE OF FIDEL BACA & CO.,
JACY PARANÁ RIVER.]




                        ESTADO DE MATTO-GROSSO NA
                        EXPOSIÇÃO INTERNACIONAL DE
                       BORRACHA DE 1912 EM NEW-YORK

                                   POR
                            LEOPOLDO DE MATTOS

                              NEW-YORK, 1912

                   DR. JOAQUIM AUGUSTO DA COSTA MARQUES
                   PRESIDENTE DO ESTADO DE MATTO-GROSSO
                                1911-1915




O ESTADO DE MATTO-GROSSO NA EXPOSIÇÃO DE BORRACHA DE 1912 EM NEW-YORK


Dos vinte Estados que compõem a Republica dos Estados Unidos do Brasil,
Matto-Grosso está collocado em segundo plano, pela sua extensão
territorial situado ao Sul dos Estados do Amazonas e Pará, tendo a Leste
os Estados de Goyaz, S. Paulo e Paraná, ao Sul a Republica do Paraguay e
a Oeste a Republica da Bolivia.

Abrange no mappa uma porção que vae approximadamente desde o 14° grao ao
Sul do Equador até o Tropico do Capricornio. Sua área immensa é de cerca
de 50175 leguas quadradas, segundo Candido Mendes, ou melhor, tern uma
superficie de 1379651 kilometros quadrados.

Sua população é actualmente de cerca de 350,000 habitantes, não incluindo
consideravel numero de indios bravios, cuja cathechese se procede com
afinco, dia a dia, com o concurso simultaneo dos Governos Federal e
Estadoal.

Sem contar a Capital, as cidades principaes do Estado são Corumbá, S.
Luiz de Caceres, Miranda, Nioac, Poconé, Sant’ Anna de Paranahyba,
Diamantina, Rosario, Livramento e o novo Municipio recentemente
installado de Sto. Antonio do Rio Madeira.

Cuyabá, sua capital, está situada á margem esquerda do rio do mesmo nome,
a 288 metros acima do nivel do mar, e deve as suas origens aos Paulistas
que formaram as legendarias bandeiras e que percorreram o Brasil
Occidental no começo do seculo XVIII.

Em 1719 Paschoal Moreira Cabral subindo o Rio Coxipó Mirim, fundou á
margem esquerda d’esta corrente uma povoação que denominou Forquilha,
hoje a cidade de Cuyabá, onde naquelles tempos se descobriu uma rica mina
de ouro.

       *       *       *       *       *

Em outros tempos, conforme Elysée Reclus, a vastissima região de
Matto-Grosso era apenas, salvo uma estreita zona mediana, não mais que
uma immensa solidão de limites indecisos e senão desconhecidos pelo
menos ainda entregues aos indios e ás feras, a qual se ligava ao resto
do Brasil por simples picadas de caçadores e pelos cursos dos rios que
ali nascem. Realmente em outros tempos eram tamanhas as difficuldades de
communicação do resto do paiz com Matto-Grosso, que ainda está na memoria
de muitos e no conhecimento dos que leem as paginas da Historia do
Brasil, a impossibilidade que tiveram as tropas reunidas nas provincias
do littoral para irem soccorrer directamente seus compatriotas de
Matto-Grosso, quando a nação brazileira teve de responder á declaração de
guerra do Paraguay.

[Illustration: A RUBBER GATHERER MAKING A RUBBER SACK BY COVERING CANVAS
WITH LIQUID RUBBER.]

Com os mil estorvos da travessia, o corpo de exercito composto de 3000
homens que partiu em Abril de 1865 do Rio de Janeiro e que só poude
organisarse em Uberaba, na bacia superior do Paraná, estava reduzido
apenas a 700 homens quando chegou a ponto inatacavel e seguro.

Vencida, porem, a guerra com o Paraguay, não ha nenhuma duvida que a
victoria do Brasil escancarou-lhe as portas de Matto-Grosso, pois que o
declive natural do solo e o curso das aguas com a liberdade da navegação
fluvial, garantida pelo triumpho, estabeleceu um serviço regular de
paquetes do Rio de Janeiro a Corumbá e Cuyabá, pela via do Rio da Prata,
passando por Montevideo, Buenos Ayres e Assumpção.

O caminho fluvial do Guaporé, Madeira e Amazonas foi muito utilisado no
seculo XVIII, depois da exploração feita por Manoel de Lima em 1742. A
navegação pelo Rio Guaporé até o Rio Madeira, até enfim Sto. Antonio,
que é o ponto inicial da navegação d’este ultimo rio, é longa e cheia de
fadiga.

Comtudo Matto-Grosso vae gradualmente se approximando do litoral do
Brasil por meio de estradas de ferro, taes como a Noroeste do Brasil
que ligal-o-á dentro em breve ao Rio de Janeiro e a estrada de ferro
já projectada que partindo de S. Luiz de Caceres irá até a antiga
cidade de Matto-Grosso, donde o rio Guaporé começa a ser navegavel até
Guajará-Mirim, ponto terminal da grande via Madeira-Mamoré Railway.

Dentro de pouco tempo, como se vê, as estradas mixtas serão una
realidade, comprehendendo rios navegaveis por vapores e os trechos de
communicação entre estes rios. O Paranápanema e o Ivahy, nos Estados
do Paraná e S. Paulo continuam para outro lado do rio Paraná subindo
o Ivinhema e o Brilhante, até as visinhas montanhas de Miranda, na
parte meridional de Matto-Grosso. As magnificas regiões de Matto-Grosso
promettem ser de futuro, e futuro já bem proximo, um grande centro de
povoamento, e conseguintemente um futuro foco de civilisação, pela
provavel fusão dos diversos elementos de immigração que para alli
certamente concorrorem com o correr dos tempos e a facilidade que forem
apresentando cada vez mais os meios de communicação. Algures se disse,
que a colonisação far-se-ha sem duvida pelo Sul, pelo lado do Paraguay e
da Argentina; mas nos dias que correm, com a presença da Madeira Mamoré
Railway, indubitavelmente a colonisação darse-á tambem pelo Norte,
facilitada a communicação pelo Rio Amazonas, de que é um dos affluentes
o Madeira, á margem direita do qual está Porto Velho, ponto inicial da
mesma Madeira Mamoré Railway. E estes effeitos já se começam a produzir
com a fundação de um novo Municipio e Comarca de Matto-Grosso, que é
o Municipio de Sto. Antonio do rio Madeira, cortado pela referida via
ferrea e a cuja região dedicaremos adiante um capitulo especial.

Já vae portanto se enchendo de população a extremidade da vertente
septentrional do territorio de Matto-Grosso, postoque a da vertente
meridional é realmente a que contem maior numero de habitantes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Matto-Grosso é uma das regiões de menor relevo do continente da America
do Sul; alli não se encontram elevações de terreno que constituam
verdadeiras montanhas.

As terras elevadas do Brasil tem os seus pontos de culminancia nas
cadeias orientaes da Mantiqueira, dos Aymorés e de Espinhaço e vão-se
abaixando proporcionalmente d’este lado para o Oeste do Estado de Goyaz e
do outro lado são as elevadas massas da cadeia dos Andes que se inclinam
para Leste com os seus contrafortes. Diz Elysée Reclus, que separando os
dois systemas orographicos, vae serpeando em forma de valle uma planicie
intermediaria, que certamente foi outr’ora um estreito maritimo separando
as duas ilhas—Brasil Oriental e Andes.

Hoje correm aguas fluviaes na depressão por onde passaram outr’ora as
aguas marinhas e a planicie está cheia actualmente de suas alluviôes. O
verdadeiro centro da America do Sul está entre as duas cidades de Cuyabá
e Corumbá.

Pará os que desconhecem a região, as vertentes são as vezes confundidas
com as serras, e em cartas geographicas se desenha uma cadeia de
montanhas mais ou menos continua, entre as bacias do Tapajóz e do
Madeira, entre as nascentes do mesmo Tapajóz e do Paraguay em seguida,
e finalmente entre ainda o Tapajóz e o Araguaya. Comtudo este relevo
semicircular não existe senão fragmentado, pois que as elevações que
dominam as planicies do alto Paraguay e seus affluentes são na realidade
um alto =chapadao= de extractos horisontaes ou mui ligeiramente
inclinados e carcomidos pelos rios que descem para o grande Amazonas.

São antes =taboleiros= que montanhas, ou ao menos estas não se elevam
senão em alguns pontos do grande planalto, attingindo, aqui e alem, uns
mil metros de altura, emquanto a elevação media do proprio paredão é de
quinhentos metros.

Assim, o conjuncto orographico do Estado de Matto-Grosso chamado
indifferentemente cordilheira dos Parecys, não apresenta aspecto
montanhoso senão para o lado do Sul; n’esta face escarpada, a rocha
é talhada a pique ou recortada em agulhas, mas do outro lado para o
Tapajóz e Xingú, uma encosta longa se estende e vae morrer gradualmente
nas planicies do Estado do Amazonas.

D’Orbigny reconheceu na eminencia da parte septentrional do Estado de
Matto-Grosso a existencia de camadas pertencentes á edade carbonifera
e correspondendo ás rochas da mesma natureza, que do lado opposto da
região se apresenta nos contrafortes bolivianos de Santa Cruz de la
Sierra. Depois d’este, Hart e Derby verificaram que as partes meridionaes
do Araxá, que são as bordas elevadas do planalto, datam provavelmente
das epochas paleozoicas, e que alli estão representadas as camadas
carboniferas devonianas e siluricas. Leitos fossiliferos encontrados
pelo geologo Smith abaixo das collinas da Chapada, 50 kilometros á Leste
de Cuyabá, puzeram fora de duvida estes factos. Mais ao Norte, na zona
de rochedos que em travessões cortam o Madeira, o Tapajóz, o Xingú, o
Tocantins e seus affluentes, as paredes desnudadas pela erosão são todas
de formação crystallina: granitos, gneis, porphiros e quartzitos.

As elevações que se desenvolvem na direcção do Sul entre as nascentes
do Paraguay e as do Araguaya, em seguida entre o Paraguay e o Paraná,
não apresentam as mesmas caracteristicas dos planaltos do Norte. As
eminencias da parte Oriental do Estado de Matto-Grosso foram esbarancadas
dos dois lados a Leste e Oeste e devastadas por estas excavações
lateraes, tomam em certos pontos o aspecto de verdadeiras cadeias de
montanhas, e assim é que desenham-se do Norte ao Sul as serras de S.
Jeronymo, do Maracajú e Anhanbahy.

Rochas eruptivas, chamadas no paiz =bassaltos=, provavelmente
porphyricas, romperam as camadas de grez que compõem as montanhas e
parece que formaram pela sua desaggregação “terras roxas,” analogas ás
que dão aos fazendeiros de S. Paulo tão copiosas colheitas de café.

Na especie de circo limitado pelo semi-circulo das elevações levantam
se massiços isolados, rochas, cujos extractos, visiveis de longe, têm
uma regularidade perfeita. Os proprios morros têm pela maior parte
formas geometricas: dir-se-ia que se esboroaram vastos lanços, deixando
paredões lisos, eguaes aos flancos de uma pyramide. Os cumes horizontaes
como se as pontas tivessem sido decepadas por um instrumento cortante
correspondem a outros cumes, e vê se que outr’ora faziam parte de um
mesmo =chapadao=. Segundo Taunay, que percorreu o paiz, estes massiços de
grez, de camadas horizontaes e regularmente superpostas, são formados de
sedimentos lacustres coados pelo mar de agua doce que outr’ora cobriu a
região.

[Illustration: HUT OF RUBBER GATHERERS ON THE UPPER ACRE.]

As ruinas d’estes paredões e das escarpas contribuiram tambem para mudar
a phisionomia da paysagem. Os escombros, apanhados e arrastados pelos
rios, foram revestir de camadas novas o solo, e muitas saliencias de
pedras desappareceram debaixo dos restos esmigalhados das montanhas e
outras não mostram senão as pontas por cima doz terrenos de formação mais
recente. Massiços que se prendiam aos planaltos e ás cadeias do interior
estão agora separados d’ellas, porque suas bases se acham soterradas e
elles emergem abruptamente do solo. Estes picos distinctos aos quaes se
deu o nome de =itambés=, erigem seus cabeços por cima dum mar de arvores
comparaveis a gigantescos edificios erguidos pela mão do homem. A Leste
da parte meridional de Matto-Grosso, elles enfileiramse e agrupam-se em
archipelagos, depois cada vez mais altos e menos numerosos, á proporção
que se caminha para Oeste, ou completamente solitarios no circulo do
horizonte, apparecem até nas margens do rio Paraguay e ainda do outro
lado do mesmo.

O alto Guaporé, Itenez dos Bolivianos, posto que comprehendido na bacia
do immenso Amazonas, como affluente do Madeira pelo Mamoré, pertence
especialmente ao Estado de Matto-Grosso, pois que a cidade d’este nome
foi fundada nas suas margens e quasi toda a população de Estado se
accumulou na depressão, cuja metade occidental este rio percorre. Sua
principal nascente, muito ferruginosa, desponta n’uma grota junto á borda
do Araxá, e corre primeiro na direcção do Sul, parallellamente a outros
rios que descem para o Paraguay; mas ao deixar as ultimas collinas o
ribeirão curva-se para Oeste, depois para Noroeste e já engrossado por
numerosos affluentes atravessa a planicie, em que está a cidade que se
chamou na sua fundação Villa-Bella e hoje se denomina Matto-Grosso.

O Paraguay é um dos rios mais notaveis da Terra como via de navegação,
segundo affirma Elysée Reclus; poucos têm um declive mais suave e fraco
proporcionalmente a sua extensão. Affirma Castelnau que elle nasce na
altitude de 305 metros; nos lugares onde as aguas tranquillas deslizam
lentamente para o mar, a altitude dos campos é apenas de 200 metros, e
a partir de um ponto situado a quatro mil kilometros do mar, o declive
é apenas de cinco centimetros. D’este modo, vapores de pequeno calado
podem subir livremente até os confins do Brasil, muito ao Norte das duas
Republicas da Argentina e Paraguay e chegar á base do planalto pelo rio
principal e pelos seus affluentes, Jaurú, Sepotuba, Cuyabá, S. Lourenço
e Taquary. O Paraguay apresenta ainda um phenomeno notavel, que é o do
cruzamento de suas nascentes com as dos affluentes do Rio Amazonas.

O Jaurú approxima-se tanto do Guaporé, que seria facil passar por um
canal as aguas do rio Occidental para um affluente do Jaurú. Outro
tributario do Paraguay, o Aguapehy, só está separado do rio Alegre, que
desce para a antiga cidade de Villa-Bella, hoje Matto-Grosso, por um
isthmo de pouca largura, de fraco relevo, que segundo Leverger, mede
2400 braças ou 5280 metros. No anno de 1772, e depois, tentou-se cavar
um canal em pontos diversos do isthmo, masas obras não chegaram a termo
por falta de commercio na localidade. Certamente estradas de ferro, em
mais ou menos dias, supprirão a ausencia do canal que ligaria Montevideo
ao Pará, passando em grande parte do Estado de Matto-Grosso, e por uma
via continental navegavel de 8300 kilometros, segundo refere Bartholomeu
Bossi.

O rio Paraguay tern como affluentez principaes os rios S. Lourenço,
engrossado pelas aguas do Cuyabá, o Taquary, o Mondego e o Apá, limite
este ultimo entre o Brasil e a Republica do Paraguay.

Por occasião das enchentes, seu nivel e o dos seus affluentes eleva-se
de dez e onze metros e derrama-se á esquerda e á direita, formando um
mar ephemero que se estende ao longe, a perder de vista e se prolonga
em =banhados=. Os primeiros viajantes hespanhoes deram o nome de lago
Xarayes á baixada onde se esparramam as aguas quasi dormentes dos braços
principaes do rio. Este lago tern de extensão cerca de 600 kilometros de
Sul a Norte, entre as boccas do Jaurú e as collinas do Fecho-dos-Morros e
em certos pontos chega a 250 de largura.

Elle não é permanente, como se pensava outr’ora, mas em qualquer epocha
do anno ha trechos alagados que os indios denominam bahias e com razão,
pois que são bahias de um antigo mar, que hoje está meio secco, e a maior
parte de taes lagoas está em communicação constante com o rio Paraguay,
ora por furos lateraes, ora por longos canaes, taes como os denominados
lagos de Uberaba, Gaiaba, Mandioré, Caceres, etc. D’entre estes lagos,
uns não contem senão agua doce trazida pela innundação fluvial, emquanto
outros, que são antigas cavidades outr’ora occupadas por agua do mar,
conservam no fundo de seus leitos camadas salinas, que dão ao liquido
um sabor caracteristico. É singular que este contraste da natureza das
aguas doces ou salinas tambem se produza nos terrenos da vasta planicie,
e assim é que campos extensos, cobertos de ricas alluviôes, deram
nascimento a mattas cerradas, e o agricultor pode muito bem alli obter
colheitas maravilhosas. É certamente por este motivo que os campos de
Matto-Grosso tanto se prestam á industria pastoril.

[Illustration: FAMILIES OF THE AMERICAN EMPLOYEES, MADEIRA MAMORÉ
RAILWAY.]

A horizontalidade do terreno, formada pelo centro da depressão do
immenso valle, impede que o confluente se conserve em um leito regular,
e as aguas escapando por ambos os lados ramificam-se n’um labirintho
do rios e falsos rios. Os ramos lateraes seguem por entre as zonas dos
=banhados=, até á confluencia do rio Taquary e do rio Miranda, que
descem das montanhas de Leste, recebendo o primeiro d’estes, na região
superior, um affluente, o Coxim, considerado pelos viajantes como um
dos mais pittorescos rios do Brasil. É curioso ver em alguns lugares o
Coxim estreitara-se entre paredões a pique, de 50 metros de altura, e as
pequenas embarcações correrem sobre elle como no fundo de um vallão que
não tem mais de 10 ou 12 metros de largura.

       *       *       *       *       *

O clima de Matto-Grosso é relativamente quente nas regiões baixas e
alagadas pelas enchentes dos rios, taes como Paraguay; nas regiões dos
planaltos o clima é salubre e frio. O movimento das columnas de ar é
determinada pela forma de corredor aberto entre a cordilheira dos Andes
e as terras altas do Brasil, bem no centro do continente Sul Americano,
e por elle são arrastadas; aos ventos tepidos proveniente da região
da Amazonia, succedem no inverno ventos que sopram do frio pampa. Nas
alturas do circo de chapadões e montanhas que rodeiam a planicie do
Estado de Matto-Grosso, o frio desce abaixo do ponto de congelação. As
copiosas chuvas trazidas pelo rebojo dos ventos que contornam o planalto
central do Brasil e vem esbarrar nos primeiros contrafortes dos Andes,
cahem com muita regularidade no verão e são frequentemente acompanhadas
de trovoadas.

Consoante alguns observadores, a queda da agua annual é de 3 metros, e em
Cuyabá contam-se mais ou menos 135 dias de chuva por anno medio.

       *       *       *       *       *

O Estado de Matto-Grosso, pela sua situação geographica no continente Sul
Americano, collocado no ponto de separação das duas grandes bacias do
Brasil, reune ao mesmo tempo as floras e as faunas da região da Amazonia
e das regiões Platinas. Entretanto, a flora tropical predomina com sua
infinita variedade de formas vegetaes em todas as regiões das florestas,
isto é, á beira dos rios, e entre as especies famosas habitantes das
margens do Rio Mar, poucas ha que não estejam representadas na região do
alto Guaporé, ou das quaes se não encontrem congeneres.

Em nenhuma parte se desenvolve como alli as palmeiras Cipós, e em 1875
uma commissão de limites descobriu uma d’estas palmeiras =Urumbamba
(Calamus procumbeus) ou Desmoncus rudentum= de Martius, com mais de
200 metros de comprimento e apenas com a grossura de um centimetro!
O algodoeiro o tabacco, a ipeccacuanha, chamada alli =poaya= nascem
espontaneamente nas planicies e nas florestas; esta ultima sobretudo
colhem-na nas florestas do alto Jaurú e dos rios visinhos. O mate, a
mais notavel das plantas da zona meridional e que faz a riqueza de
algumas regiões como do Estado do Paraná, cresce alli espontaneamente
entre Miranda e o rio Apá, sem fallar propriamente da seringueira, que é
encontrada em immensas e cerradas florestas n’uma extensão comprehendida
desde Cuyabá até o Madeira, e a qual fará o assumpto especial d’este
ligeiro exposto.

[Illustration: EXCAVATING FOR THE MAMORÉ RAILWAY AT KILOMETER 263.2.]

[Illustration: HOSPITAL FOR EMPLOYEES OF MADEIRA MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

As madeiras de construcção são abundantissimas e em grande variedade,
podendo-se citar o pao-brasil, o jacarandá, a peroba, a canella, o cedro,
o jequitibá, a massaranduba, o pao-d’arco, o pao-ferro, o pao-setim, o
vinhatico, etc.

Entre os animaes, encontram-se os veados, as antas e as onças, alem de
um grande numero de outros pequenos, proprios das regiões tropicaes. As
aves e os passaros, aves ribeirinhas e passaros cantores das florestas,
são pela sua variedade quasi innumeros. A avestruz vinda das regiões dos
pampas chegou as planicies marginaes do alto Paraguay; os peixes abundam
n’uma riquissima e magnifica variedade nos grandes e pequenos rios.

No reino mineral, o Estado de Matto-Grosso possúe minas numerosas de
ouro, prata, platina, cobre, estanho, chumbo, mercurio, carvão de pedra,
ferro, pedras, preciosas, diamantes, &c., existindo já quatro companhias
inglezas na exploração de minas de ouro. Ha tambem granitos, crystal de
rocha, malacacheta, pedra calcaria, sal-gemma, &c. Finalmente nas regiões
do Araxá, ha fontes de aguas mineraes sulphurosas.

O Estado de Matto-Grosso é a região do Brasil onde se encontram as
maiores fazendas de gado, não só em extensão territorial, como em numero
de cabeças de gado vaccum e cavallar, havendo algumas que contam cem mil
cabeças. Calcula-se o numero de cabeças de gado vaccum em Matto-Grosso em
dois bilhões e quinhentas mil.

Nos dias que correm, ainda é um pouco difficil o transporte de gado de
Matto-Grosso para o Rio de Janeiro, principalmente, e a exportação é
feita pelo caminho de Oeste até Uberaba, onde a invernada se faz em dois
ou trez mezes, até que os animaes se refaçam e possam ser conduzidos em
caminho de ferro até o littoral do Rio de Janeiro. Vê-se, entretanto
que, com a terminação da via ferrea Noroeste do Brasil, o problema do
transporte para o littoral será resolvido, assim como a Madeira Mamoré
Railway, contando Matto-Grosso presentemente com rios navegaveis e dentro
de bem pouco tempo com a via ferrea de que já fallamos, de S. Luiz de
Caceres á antiga cidade de Matto-Grosso, donde começa a ser navegavel o
rio Guaporé até Guajará-Mirim, ponto terminal da Madeira Mamoré Railway,
resolverá tambem o problema da exportação de gado para os Estados do
Amazonas, Pará, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

D’este leve exposto conclue-se que o territorio do Estado de Matto-Grosso
é grandemente rico de gado e ouro, de diamante e café, de tabaco e mate,
de borracha e ipecacuanha e de todos os productos dos tropicos e das
zonas temperadas:—elle só bastaria para constituir um dos mais vastos e
mais opulentos imperios do mundo!

[Illustration: RUBBER STATION ON THE UPPER MADEIRA RIVER ALONGSIDE
MADEIRA MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

Dotado de um clima, se bem que quente ao Norte, porem temperado e mesmo
frio nas demais regiões, como a dos planaltos, apresentando um accumulo
de riquezas raro e ainda pouco explorado como está, forçosamente para lá
o homem das diversas partes da Terra, na sua constante actividade, na sua
crescente lucta pela vida, immigrará e concorrerá com a intelligencia
e com o esforço do trabalho, para fazer d’aquella parte do Brasil um
grande emporio de industrias, commercio, navegação, caminhos de ferro e
conseguintemente uma grande nascente de civilisação, donde, pela fusão
das diversas raças, o mesmo homem surgirá sempre grande, sempre vencedor
no immenso concerto e na elevada harmonia da Vida e da Terra!

       *       *       *       *       *

A borracha que se vê n’esta Exposição é extrahida e vinda toda das vastas
regiões cortadas pelos rios Machados, ou Dgy-Paraná, Jamary, Jacy-Paraná,
Mutum-Paraná, Paca-Nova e Guaporé com seus affluentes, aquelles a seu
turno affluentes do grande rio Madeira, em cuja margem direita está
situado o novo Municipio e Comarca de Sto. Antonio do rio Madeira,
installado em 2 de Julho do anno corrente.

O novo Municipio tem os seguintes limites: partindo da cachoeira de Sto.
Antonio no rio Madeira, no parallelo de 8° 48′, o rio Madeira acima; o
rio Mamoré acima até a foz do Guaporé no parallelo de 12, este parallelo
até a sua intersecção com o rio Camararé; este rio abaixo até a sua
confluencia no Juruema; este rio abaixo até o ponto em que se reune ao
Arinos; o parallelo que n’este ponto passa até a sua intersecção com o
rio S. Manuel; este rio abaixo até sua confluencia no Tapajóz; e d’este
ponto até encontrar a cachoeira de Sto. Antonio no Rio Madeira a linha
que extrema os territorios dos Estados de Matto-Grosso e do Amazonas.

Todo o immenso territorio do novo Municipio é cortado ao Norte pela
Madeira Mamoré Railway, que conta 365 kilometros de via ferrea já
construidos, partindo de Porto Velho no Estado do Amazonas, distante 7
kilometros da sede propriamente do Municipio, até Guajará-Mirim.

A via ferrea Madeira Mamoré, alem das estações já construidas, em Porto
Velho, Candelaria, Sto. Antonio, Jacy-Paraná, Abunã, Villa Murtinho e
Guajará-Mirim, tem 46 pontos de parada que correspondem ao numero dos
seus acampamentos.

[Illustration: PORTO VELHO INITIAL POINT OF MADEIRA MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

Entre as vias de communicação do novo Municipio de Sto. Antonio do rio
Madeira com os visinhos Estados do Amazonas e Pará e tambem com a capital
e outras cidades do Estado de Matto-Grosso, comecemos por dizer algo da
linha telegraphica ora ainda em construcção por conta do Governo Federal
e da respectiva estrada de rodagem. São duas as turmas de engenheiros e
operarios que constroem a linha telegraphica, uma partida do Norte—Sto.
Antonio—e outra do Sul—Diamantina. Partindo de Sto. Antonio, a linha
telegraphica segue o parallelo 8° 48′ até encontrar o rio Jamary, n’uma
extensão de cerca de sessenta kilometros; ahi chegando desvia se para o
rumo das cabeceiras do rio Dgy-Paraná, no lugar denominado Urupá, onde
se deve encontrar com a turma do Sul e onde a ligação será feita. A 3 de
Junho de 1912 na mais alta cabeceira do rio Dgy-Paraná, já foi inaugurada
a estação telegraphica de José Bonifacio, pela turma do Sul, emquanto
a do Norte tambem já inaugurou em data anterior as estações de Sto.
Antonio do rio Madeira e Jamary. Este emprehendimento notavel está sob a
intelligencia e extraordinaria dedicação do snr. Coronel de Engenheiros
do Exercito Brazileiro, Candido Rondon, que tem o record das construcções
de linhas telegraphicas no Brasil e quiçá na America do Sul.

Prompta dentro de um anno, mais ou menos, a linha telegraphica
marginará uma estrada de rodagem de 40 metros de largura, de cerca de
duzentas leguas de extensão a partir de Cuyabá até Sto. Antonio do rio
Madeira. Esta immensa via de communicação cortando todo um vasto sertão
sobretudo rico em borracha e ouro, terá de dez em dez leguas uma estação
telegraphica.

Em Porto Velho, ponto inicial da Madeira Mamoré Railway, ha já por sua
vez funccionando uma poderosa estação radiographica do systema Marconi e
que se communica diariamente com Manáos e já se tem communicado mesmo com
Iquitos e com os Departamentos Federaes do Acre, do Purús e do Juruá.

Quanto á navegação de Manáos até Sto. Antonio do rio Madeira, ella é
feita em boas condições e em navios confortaveis. Nas aguas baixas,
isto é, nos tempos da secca do grande rio Amazonas e seus affluentes,
sobem de Manáos até aquelles pontos os navios de tonelagem até 500,
nos tempos de aguas altas, em que o valle do Amazonas todo se alaga,
navios transantlaticos de 7 mil a nove mil toneladas sobem de Manáos
até alli, em quatro dias de viagem, como já tem succedido no transporte
de materiaes para construcção da Madeira Mamoré Railway, acostando
facilmente em 2 caes feitos de madeira de lei, o primeiro construido em
frente as officinas de Porto Velho e o segundo em Candelaria. Por sua vez
o Governo da Republica está resolvido a construir um caes de pedra e cal
entre Porto Velho e Sto. Antonio.

[Illustration: IRON BRIDGE ON PARANÁ RIVER.]

Os pequenos navios que navegam durante a secca dos rios, teem
accomodações para passageiros de 1.ª e 3.ª classe, são illuminados á
luz electrica, possuem fabricas de gelo e fazem bem a viagem de Manáos
a Porto Velho e Sto. Antonio em cerca de 5 dias, com uma media de
velocidade de 10 milhas por hora, fazendo escala por pequenos portos e
cidades amazonenses, situadas nas margens do rio Madeira. Na descida
tanto dos grandes transantlaticos como dos pequenos navios de 500
toneladas, a viagem se faz mais rapidamente, em 3 e 4 dias.

       *       *       *       *       *

A borracha de Sto. Antonio do rio Madeira é da mesma natureza phisica
e chimica de toda borracha do valle do Amazonas, e esta asserção salta
á vista, quando nos lembramos que a parte do Estado de Matto-Grosso
occupada pelo novo Municipio é justamente aquella limitrophe dos Estados
do Amazonas e do Pará.

Na parça de Manáos, para onde vem o producto pela via do rio Madeira,
e na de Belém do Pará onde é enviada pela via do rio Tapajóz, ella é
sempre cotada pelos mesmos preços e nas mesmas condições das produzidas
propriamente nas regiões da Amazonia.

A sua producção, que vem num crescendo desde o anno de 1906, é
actualmente de cerca de 2 milhões de kilos annuaes, que augmentará
certamente numa proporção—impossivel desde já de ser prevista—com a
presença e o desenvolvimento da Madeira Mamoré Railway, da estrada de
rodagem da linha telegraphica e os progressos constantes da navegação.

No. 1ro. semestre do anno fluente a producção da borracha foi superior
a de não importa qual seja o anno desde 1907, conforme se verifica do
quadro estatistico annexo.

N’aquellas regiões, comprehendidas desde Cuyabá até a sede do novo
Municipio, existem seringaes capazes de produzir por si sós dentro do
periodo de um anno, mais de quarenta milhões de kilos de borracha.

Pará attingir a este ideal, bastaria que os capitaes concorressem para
exploração de uma industria extractiva, cuja fonte brota espontaneamente
da terra sem carencia de cultivo e para animar e estimular aquelles que
desejam ali empregar os seus esforços e capitaes, ahi está a lei do
Governo do Estado de Matto-Grosso, que offerece favores especiaes aos
que, alem propriamente da exploração dos vastos seringaes já existentes,
se quizerem dedicar ao plantio e cultivo da mesma =syphonia= elastica.

Tratando-se uma exposição de borracha em New-York, é justo chamarmos
a attenção dos que nos queiram ler para o facto bem importante da
concorrencia que já começa dos capitaes norte-americanos para a
exploração d’aquella região.

O grande capitalists Percival Farquhar, americano do Norte, já incorporou
duas companhias sob as razões sociaes de Julio Muller Rubber, e Guaporé
Rubber, com o fim não só de explorar a industria extractiva de =hevea
brasiliensis=, como tambem para os diversos ramos de agricultura
attinentes ao fabrico do assucar, dos tecidos de algodão &c. &c.

[Illustration: KILOMETER 212 MADEIRA MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

Actualmente a extracção da borracha nos vastos seringaes do Municipio
de Sto. Antonio do rio Madeira occupa cerca de cinco mil trabalhadores,
mas este numero augmentará cada vez mais, positivamente, á proporção que
o referido Municipio se for tornando o ponto de convergencia para onde
affluirão as correntes commerciaes, industriaes e agricolas dos centros
de Matto-Grosso e da Republica da Bolivia.

Isto é facil de imaginar, quando vemos que a estrada de ferro Madeira
Mamoré por seá em communicação para o Sul com S. Luiz de Caceres por
meio do rio Guaporé e da estrada de ferro que de S. Luiz de Caceres irá
até á antiga cidade de Matto-Grosso, ligando assim a bacia do Prata de
intermedio o rio Paraguay—á bacia do rio Amazonas, e para Leste, a mesma
Madeira Mamoré Railway levará os seus trilhos até Ribeira-Alta, ligando
as vastas e riquissimas regiões da Republica Boliviana tambem á bacia do
Amazonas, de intermedio o rio Madeira. Presentemente, parte para aquella
região o Engenheiro chefe e Director da Madeira Mamoré Railway, Mr. H.
Dose, que vai dar começo a construcção do referido ramal de Guajará
Mirim—Matto-Grosso—á Ribeira Alta-Bolivia—, que ficará concluida dentro
do praso de um anno e meio e terá cerca de cem kilometros de extensão.

Accrescendo a isto ainda a construcção prompta, dentro de um anno, da
grande estrada de rodagem da linha telegraphica de Cuyabá até Sto.
Antonio do rio Madeira, poderemos facilmente imaginar o que n’um futuro,
que nada faz pensar será muito remoto, irá ser o novo Municipio de
Sto. Antonio do rio Madeira, como um verdadeiro e incontestavel ponto
de convergencia de tão fortes e ricas correntes de desenvolvimento de
progresso e de civilisação.

Antes de terminar, não devemos esquecer que o territorio em questão não
se presta somente á producção da gomma elastica, que aliás como em todo
o valle do Amazonas é agreste e nasce á lei da natureza. Convem dizer
que alli, alem do cacao e do algodão, que tambem são agrestes, podem ser
plantados e cultivados a canna de assucar, o café, a baunilha, o milho, o
feijão, o arroz, o tabaco, a batata, a castanha, &c.

A propria Madeira Mamoré Railway Co., concessionaria de uma vasta faixa
de terra á margem de sua linha ferrea, pensa em fazer o plantio do cacao,
da canna de assucar, &c., &c., aproveitando os referidos terrenos.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SECTION OF A ROAD IN USE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF MADEIRA
MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

De tudo o que fica exposto em linhas bem ligeiras e nas quaes procuramos
nos approximar sempre da verdade, dando noticias sobre a região em
questão, pode-se concluir facilmente que só o novo Municipio de Sto.
Antonio do rio Madeira, que exporta actualmente para o commercio mundial,
via Pará e Manáos, cerca de 2 milhões de kilos de borracha, passará a
exportar dentro de poucos annos, sobretudo com a immigração que todos os
factores nos levam esperar, de 10 a 15 milhões.

       *       *       *       *       *

O auctor d’este exposto pede indulgencia para as lacunas que nelle forem
encontradas:—foi escripto nos raros momentos livres ao trabalho fatigante
de organisar a exposição das amostras de borracha até o respectivo
embarque em Manáos para New-York.

As amostras da borracha de Matto-Grosso que figuram no recinto da
Exposição, são expostas por ordem do Governo, pela benemerita Associação
Commercial do Amazonas.


ESTADO DE MATTO GROSSO

DELEGACIA FISCAL DO NORTE

QUADRO DEMONSTRATIVO DA PRODUCÇÃO DA BORRACHA DOS VALLES DO MADEIRA
E ALTO TAPAJÓZ NOS ANNOS de 1907 a 1912, EM COMPARAÇÃO COM A MESMA
PRODUCÇÃO NO PRIMEIRO SEMESTRE DE 1912.

    Procedencia                        1907      1908       1909

    Machado e Jamary                 1.092454  1.252194    910982
    Jacy Paraná Alto Madeira e Moré     98464    152713    150759
    Alto Tapajóz                                 156034    167841
                                     --------  --------  --------
                                     1.190918  1.560941  1.229582

    Procedencia                        1910      1911      1912
                                                         só o lo.
                                                         semestre
    Machado e Jamary                 1.295605  1.317917  1.315995
    Jacy Paraná Alto Madeira e Moré    142458    201562    259612
    Alto Tapajóz                       107458     73688    113453
                                     --------  --------  --------
                                     1.545521  1.593167  1.689060

[Illustration: LAST CAMP IN CONSTRUCTION OF MADEIRA MAMORÉ RAILWAY.]

[Illustration: PORTO VELHO.]




STATE OF BAHIA




EXHIBITS OF THE STATE OF BAHIA AT THE INTERNATIONAL RUBBER EXHIBITION IN
NEW YORK, 1912


STATE OF BAHIA.

1 bale of 100 kilos of superior maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of 100 kilos of first quality maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of 100 kilos of second quality maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of 50 kilos of superior mangabeira rubber.

1 bale of 50 kilos of first quality of mangabeira rubber.

1 package of 20 kilos of caucho rubber.

Various statistical tables, photographs, diagrams and a panoramic view of
the City of Bahia.

Books and pamphlets concerning the natural resources of the state.


BY S. HESS & COMPANY.

Samples of the various kinds of native rubber of Bahia.

Two sacks of the seed of the maniçoba rubber tree cultivated in Bahia.

Specimens of the maniçoba tree.


BY F. STEVENSON & COMPANY, LTD.

1 bale of 100 kilos of superior maniçoba rubber from Jequié.


BY M. ULMANN & COMPANY.

1 bale of 50 kilos of superior maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of 50 kilos of first quality maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of superior mangabeira rubber.

1 package of caucho rubber from the State of Bahia.


BY VON DER LINDE & COMPANY.

Specimens of the various kinds of rubber, from the State of Bahia, in a
glass case.


BY MORAES & COMPANY.

1 bale of 100 kilos of superior maniçoba rubber.


By JOSÉ C. DA COSTA SANTOS.

1 bale of superior maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of first quality maniçoba rubber.

1 bale of second quality maniçoba rubber.

Specimens of the various kinds of rubber of Bahia.


STATE OF ALAGOAS.

Specimens of various kinds of rubber.

Specimens of the rubber grown in JARAGUA.

These specimens were sent by Mr. Americo Mello, representative of the
Commercial Museum of Rio de Janeiro, in the State of Alagoas.


STATE OF PERNAMBUCO.

Two large packages of the various kinds of rubber grown in the State.
These were sent by Dr. Antonio Valenca, representative of the Commercial
Museum of Rio de Janeiro, in the State of Pernambuco.




STATE OF MINAS GERAES




STATE OF MINAS GERAES—PROVISIONAL NOTE


EXHIBITS

1. Wild Manisoba (Manihot) Rubber in the raw and cleaned market condition.

2. Planted Manisoba Rubber, viz.: (a) Fine; (b) Seconds; (c) Scrap.

3. Photographs taken on the San Francisco River, the rubber region of the
“Highlands of Brazil.”

4. Photographs of Rubber Trees, viz.: (a) Manihot Glaziovii; (b) Manihot
Heptaphylla; (c) Manihot Piauhyensis.

5. Photographs of Bello Horisonte, capital of the State of Minas Geraes,
and of other localities of importance and general interest. Maps of the
State and Climatological Charts.




BRAZIL DAY

Saturday, September 28





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRAZIL, THE LAND OF RUBBER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


