The Project Gutenberg eBook of A thoughtless seven
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A thoughtless seven

Author: Amy Le Feuvre

Illustrator: William H. C. Groome

Release date: March 27, 2025 [eBook #75734]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society, 1904


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A THOUGHTLESS SEVEN ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: THE BOYS AND SHE WERE AT DAGGERS DRAWN.]



                        A THOUGHTLESS SEVEN


                                BY

                          AMY LE FEUVRE

       AUTHOR OF "PROBABLE SONS," "TEDDY'S BUTTON," "ODD,"
          "ERIC'S GOOD NEWS," "A PUZZLING PAIR," ETC.



               _WITH TWENTY-SEVEN ILLUSTRATIONS._


                             LONDON
                   THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
        4 Bouverie Street and 65 St. Paul's Churchyard E.C.



                       BY THE SAME AUTHOR


     A Bit of Rough Road.        |   Miss Lavender's Boy, and
     Heather's Mistress.         |     Other Sketches.
     The Mender.                 |   Me and Nobbles.
     Odd made Even. A sequel     |   Odd.
       to "Odd."                 |   A Puzzling Pair.
     The Carved Cupboard.        |   His Little Daughter.
     On the Edge of a Moor.      |   Bulbs and Blossoms.
     Dwell Deep; or, Hilda       |   Bunny's Friends.
       Thorn's Life Story.       |   Eric's Good News.
     Jill's Red Bag.             |   Probable Sons.
     Legend Led.                 |   Teddy's Button.
     A Little Maid.              |


             LONDON: THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY



                             CONTENTS

                               ————

CHAP.

    I. THOUGHTLESS

   II. THINKING

  III. STARTING

   IV. TELLING

    V. GROWING

   VI. WORKING

  VII. PRAYING

 VIII. REAPING



                        A THOUGHTLESS SEVEN

                          [Illustration]

CHAPTER I

Thoughtless

"SHE'S a good old soul in her way; but we are not infants in the
nursery, and will manage a jolly sight better without her."

"And we'll have a good fling while we are about it, I say. For she said
she would be back in a week."

"I shall do my best to keep order at mealtimes, of course; but I shan't
be hard on you the rest of the day. Now, Doodle-doo, leave that cushion
alone. Remember what the last one did."

It was Sunday afternoon, and we were all enjoying ourselves in the
schoolroom upstairs. Dinner was over; there was a deluge of rain coming
down; and the blazing fire and a bag of chestnuts were keeping us busy.
It is needless to say that we were not sitting up in chairs in the
orthodox fashion. Pat, the eldest of us, in his eighteenth year, was
reposing full length on our shabby old couch; Taters was astride on
one end of it; Honey was seated on the coal-scuttle, her feet inside
the fender; and Thunder and I were lying flat on the hearthrug; whilst
Doodle-doo was changing his position every minute, and trying to make
every one else do the same.

Lest our names should be thought queer ones, I should explain that
they were of our own coining; our baptismal ones were too respectable
to find favour in our eyes. I went by the brief synonym of "Li," or
"Lightning," as Thunder and I invariably did things together; and I
certainly outdid them all in swiftness of thought and action.

[Illustration: I BROUGHT DOWN THE TABLECLOTH TO THE GROUND.]

We had just recovered from scarlet fever; our parents were abroad,
and our good old German governess had suddenly been summoned home to
a dying mother. Nurse was with us, of course; but Pixie, a delicate
little fellow of six, who had fared the worst of us all in the fever,
took up much of her time and attention, and we elder ones had long ago
escaped and defiee her rule.

"Throw us another nut," Pat demanded.

I threw, aiming with such exact precision at his nose, that with a yell
he sprang up and gave chase to me round the table. Round and round we
spun, until I brought down the table-cloth to the ground, and with it a
china flower-pot of mignonette.

That sobered us, and we took up our former position again, Honey
remarking, "I'm sure we ought to be better employed on Sunday afternoon
than making such a row. Why don't some of you get a book to read?"

"I've read all the Sunday books again and again," I said with a sigh,
for books were my delight.

"No one can keep pace with Li," observed Taters thoughtfully, as she
left her seat to put another chestnut on the bars; "why don't you start
reading the Bible? That would take you a few Sundays to get through."

I stared at her. "The Bible! Why, no one reads that for the sake of
reading."

"What's the good of it, then?" demanded Taters, who was nothing if she
was not argumentative.

"To preach from, of course," put in Doodle-doo; "and if I had the
chance, I wouldn't give such rotten sermons out of it as we heard this
morning."

"Well, come on; give us a sermon, if you are so good at it. We'll give
you a chance, and a text too. Find him one, Li; there's a Bible on the
bookshelf."

I found the Bible that Pat indicated, opened it in a hurry, and called
out the first words that met my eye—"'One thing thou lackest.'"

Honey looked up gravely and sweetly. "You're not to make fun,
Doodle-doo," she said.

Doodle-doo held himself erect, and ruffled his cock's-comb, as we
called it, in the importance of his position.

"Ahem!" he began. "My sermon will be brief, but to the point. Pat, one
thing thou lackest—'tis control of thy beastly temper. Honey, one thing
thou lackest—'tis female tidiness. Taters, one thing thou lackest—'tis
the knowledge that thou art an ignoramus. Thunder, one thing thou
lackest—'tis a light and contented spirit. Lightning, one thing thou
lackest—'tis patient perseverance."

"And, Doodle-doo, one thing thou lackest," I put in hastily—"'tis the
art of keeping thy cackling voice still."

[Illustration]

"Well, young people, what is the discussion?"

We turned round, and found that Miss Moffat from next door had quietly
opened the door and come in amongst us. She was a little old maid
whom we all loved. All through our illness she had been in and out,
changing her dress most carefully each time to avoid spreading the
infection. Books and fruit had been plentifully supplied, and we were
not surprised to see her hands full of books and papers now.

[Illustration]

"A little Sunday reading, my dears. I thought you might be in want of
some. Are you telling each other of your faults, may I ask?"

"Doodle-doo is trying to preach," Tater said, her snub nose well in the
air; "but his crows, like those of his namesake, are about nothing at
all."

"And what is the subject?"

"'One thing thou lackest,' was the text I gave him," I said glibly.
"Don't look so shocked, Miss Moffat; we weren't making fun of it."

"It is a solemn verse to take up so lightly," said our friend gravely.
"Do you know the occasion of our Lord's saying those words?"

"Yes. Don't preach to us, there's a good soul;" and Pat threw up his
long arms and stretched himself with a terrific yawn.

"I am on my way to read to a blind woman," said Miss Moffitt briskly;
"there are your books."

Then looking over her spectacles at us in her quaint, sweet way, she
said—

"There is 'one thing lacking' with each one of you boys and girls. Try
and find it out for yourselves, and let me know when you succeed in
getting it. I should not like to see any of you one day 'weighed in the
balances and found wanting.'"

And then she left us.

There was silence for a few minutes; we were busy distributing the
literature which had been brought us.

Then Thunder observed, knitting his black brows into a heavier frown
than usual—

"I shouldn't have thought little Moffat was a religious person; but you
can never see through a woman—they're always up to artful dodges."

"She isn't religious," Doodle-doo said; "she only wanted to add force
to my little preach."

"Shut up," said Pat, giving a kick at him as he passed the sofa; "my
'beastly temper' won't stand a word more from you."

"She's not a goody person, nor a prig," argued Taters, "so she can't be
religious; and her face is as round and ruddy as an apple."

"What is a religious person?" I asked. "I don't mean a hypocrite, but a
real true one. What do they believe that we don't believe? Why should
it be such an awfully canty thing to be good?"

"Are you going to try it, Li?"

"I sometimes think," said Honey meditatively, as she deliberately poked
her slippered foot into the red-hot embers and stirred them into a
blaze, "that after all 'we' may be the hypocrites. What did we kneel
down and pray for in church this morning?—'Grant that we may hereafter
live a godly, righteous, and sober life.' We haven't the smallest
intention of doing it."

"Don't talk rot!" was Pat's response to this.

And, turning to our books, we dropped the subject.



CHAPTER II

Thinking

[Illustration] "WHAT'S the row with old Li?"

"Give her a pinch, Thunder; she's half asleep."

"She's planning some fiendish trick, I bet."

We were at breakfast, and Honey, who was pouring out the coffee, looked
across at me curiously after these remarks.

"She was talking in her sleep last night, and jumping about like a
dancing doll; I expect the chestnuts gave her indigestion."

"Rubbish!" I said quickly. "If you had had the horrible dreams I had,
you wouldn't feel very spry in the morning. It was awful; I didn't
sleep a wink."

"Li is a wonder," said Pat admiringly; "she dreams wide awake, and eats
her breakfast fast asleep."

I was about to retort angrily, when the door opened, and nurse appeared
with Pixie. The seven years between him and Taters made him appear a
perfect baby to us, and we all petted him accordingly. He was a pale,
fragile little fellow, with a quaintness and courage all his own; but
in spite of his old-fashioned talk, he was a thorough child.

"I want one of you young ladies to take Master Lionel out this morning;
it's my busy day," announced nurse.

"All right; I'll take him," said I.

"Don't walk him off his legs, and bring him in before twelve o'clock."

Saying which, nurse departed; and we began to make our plans for the
day. Pat and Doodle-doo were going out on their bicycles, Taters and
Honey out shopping, and, after a little persuasion, Thunder said he
would come to the common with Pixie and me. Our house was in a London
suburb; but the common stretched away to green fields and lanes, and
was a favourite resort of ours.

Pixie, as usual, was full of talk, and beguiled the way by his
extraordinary questions and ideas.

It was a bright sunny morning, and wonderfully mild for the time of
year; so when we arrived at the common, Thunder and I rested on one of
the seats, whilst Pixie played about.

"I wonder when Pater will write and suggest a change of air for us!"
grumbled Thunder. "We ought to go off to the sea or somewhere! I don't
think I shall ever be the same again as I was before that rotten fever!
I'm quite fagged out now with this bit of a walk!"

"Fancy if one of us had died!" I said lugubriously; for Thunder's
remarks were never cheering, and I did not feel in a mood to comfort
him. "You or I might have. If we had, I wonder what we should have been
doing now?"

Thunder's black brows scowled. "You needn't have such dismal fancies!"

"Well, but," I persisted, "I half think I may be going to die; for
I had such awful dreams last night! I can't help feeling they were
warnings."

"What were they like?"

"I kept feeling myself in a pair of scales, and I couldn't make myself
heavy enough to keep down—I would swing up in the air! I clutched hold
of the sides of the scale, and pressed down with my whole weight, but
it was no good, and all the time a voice kept repeating, like the tick
of a clock, 'Weighed in the balances and found wanting! One thing thou
lackest!' I woke up in an awful fright, and couldn't get to sleep for
ages, and when I did, I dreamt again, that I was running for my life
away from Miss Moffat, who, brandishing a red-hot poker close to my
eyes, was shrieking out, 'One thing thou lackest!'"

Thunder laughed.

I added seriously, "We're a wicked lot, and I'm really and truly going
to find out the one thing lacking with me. I won't stand another night
like last night. What is it, Pixie?"

[Illustration: "DID HE SEE ME JUST NOW WHEN I WAS PLAYING?"]

He was standing before us with troubled eyes.

"Is God looking out of the sky this morning?"

"I suppose so," I said; "Why?"

"Did He see me just now, when I was playing at killing a snake?"

"What have you been doing?" I asked severely.

"I've cut one of God's dear little worms into two pieces! Will He be
angry?"

"Go and stick them together again!" laughed Thunder.

But tears were very near the surface with Pixie, and clasping his
hands, he went on—

"I was going to be 'such' a good boy to-day, and I didn't really mean
to kill the little worm with my stick—it was too soft! Will God forgive
me, do you think?"

"Of course He will," I said impatiently; "you didn't mean to do it."
Then, with a change of tone, I said, "Will you go to heaven if you die,
Pixie?"

He looked at me, then nodded. "Jesus loves Pixie, and Pixie wants to go
to Him in heaven very much sometimes!"

He ran away to play, and I said with a sigh, "He has got what we
haven't. I shouldn't go to heaven if I died; neither would you, old
Thun! Fancy the difference between Pixie's conscience and ours, if he
thinks cutting a worm in two an awful sin!"

Thunder remained silent for a little; then he said—

"Being religious won't suit you, Li; don't you try it! You could never
keep up being a prig, if you started!"

"Look here!" I said warmly. "I don't intend being a prig; but if I like
to turn religious I shall, and no one shall stop me!"

I jumped up from the seat, and started running races with Pixie, whilst
Thunder whipped out a thrilling tale from his pocket, and sat on
reading till it was time to go home. I laughed and talked my loudest
for the rest of the day; but I was miserable. "One thing thou lackest,"
rang in my ears. And at last, after our evening meal was over, I
slipped away from all the noise and laughter in the schoolroom, and
went down to the dining-room, where a bright fire was blazing. Then,
taking hold of a Bible I found there, I drew up a chair to the fire,
and commenced studying the story of the young man who lacked the one
thing.

"I suppose," I said to myself, "that his fault was not following
Christ; but it must be awfully difficult to lead a good life! I suppose
if I was to start I should have to say prayers half an hour long, and
be always reading the Bible, which is so dry. I should have to give up
all fun, and story-books, and fighting with the boys; and then they'd
all hate me, and vote me a prig! Oh, I couldn't do it! It would be as
dull as ditch water! Yet I do want, oh, I do want to be sure of heaven!
I know I'm not right; I know I'm awfully wicked. If only God would
turn me suddenly into a saint without any trouble on my part! I'm sure
some people get converted like that. Yet I don't want to be a regular
goody-goody; I despise them so—they're always so full of cant. I don't
know what I want. I should like to be right with God, and not be so
afraid of Him! This young man went away grieved, it says; he couldn't
do it. I suppose I shouldn't have to give up riches to follow Christ,
because I haven't any to give up; but I should have to give up other
things quite as bad."

[Illustration: THEN, WITH A WHOOP AND A RUSH, IN TUMBLED DOODLE-DOO AND
 TATERS! IN AN INSTANT I WAS ON MY FEET; STUFFING THE BIBLE
 UNDER THE CUSHION OF MY CHAIR.]

And so I meditated, and at last such an overwhelming sense of my own
wickedness and shortcomings came over me that I dropped on my knees,
and put up the first real prayer in life, though perhaps it may sound a
queer one.

   "O God, I'll follow Christ, if You'll make it easy for me. I don't want
to be turned into a goody person, but I do want to be right at the
Judgment Day. I do want my sins forgiven, but don't let me have to give
up all fun. And will You put me straight at once—to-night? I can't stop
till to-morrow."

Then I waited for something to happen—some wonderful feeling to come
over me; but it didn't come.

And then, with a whoop and a rush, in tumbled Doodle-doo and Taters!

In an instant I was on my feet; stuffing the Bible under the cushion of
my chair.

"Aha! We've caught the truant! She looks quite guilty. Take hold of her
legs, Taters, and I'll take her arms, and we'll find out what she's
been doing!"

But I was not so easily caught, and for the next ten minutes we had a
breathless chase through the house, until nurse held me fast.

"Miss Mary, I'm ashamed of you! Nearly fifteen, and romping like a boy!
Go to the schoolroom and be quiet. You've woke Master Lionel out of his
first sleep, and now he'll be restless for an hour or so. How I wish
Fräulein were here!"

A wish poor nurse very often expressed!



CHAPTER III

Starting

[Illustration] I LAY awake that night thinking.

Honey and I shared the same room. She generally made me impatient
by her leisurely movements, and I was often fast asleep long before
she came to bed; but now I lay awake and listened to her heavy
breathing—sleep would not come to me.

Why had not God answered my prayer?

I had been quite honest about it. How was it I felt just the same, and
nothing had happened? And then again the refrain began in my ears, "One
thing thou lackest. Weighed in the balances, and found wanting."

"I do wish I had never found out that troublesome text! I suppose it is
a judgment on me for treating it so lightly. I wonder what became of
that young man; where is he now? I suppose he is either in heaven or
hell this very minute; and if he is in hell, what would he give to have
another chance—to have 'my' chance?"

And then I could bear my thoughts no longer. Out of bed I crept; and,
shivering, knelt in the darkness and cold.

"O God, I'm afraid I wasn't in earnest. I'm in dead earnest now. I'll
give up everything, and won't care what the others say, if only You
will forgive and convert me. I'll give up all story-books if they're
wicked, and will read nothing but the Bible. I'll follow Christ at all
costs, however difficult and gloomy it will be. I 'must' be forgiven. I
ask Thee now to save me, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen."

Again I laid my head down on my pillow, and this time was soon fast
asleep, never waking till our maid came to call us the next morning.

"You're rather silent, Li," said Honey, as she brushed out her golden
hair. "Are you half asleep still?"

"No; I'm very much awake," was my response. "I am having very serious
thoughts. Honey, do you believe God answers prayer?"

"I suppose so."

"How do we know He does?"

"By getting the answer, I should think. And, of course, the Bible says
so."

"Where?" And I rushed to a small table and took hold of my Bible at
once.

[Illustration]

"I don't know," said Honey, eyeing me perplexedly. "Isn't there a verse
somewhere, 'Ask, and it shall be given you'?"

"Yes, of course there is. The fact is, last night I asked God to—well,
you know, convert me—make me a proper Christian, and I want to know if
He has done it. I don't feel any different this morning. Do I look any
different? Do you think He has done it?"

"Li, you aren't making fun, are you?"

"Fun! I'm in downright sober earnest! I'm going to follow Christ. I
promised last night, so no more larks for me. I shall be reading my
Bible most of the day—at least, do you think an hour a day would be
enough to begin with?" My tone was rather pitiful, for the prospect
seemed dreary.

But Honey did not answer; she looked quite dazed.

"If I only knew for certain God had answered me, I wouldn't mind," I
went on; "but of course I have promised to live as a Christian, and
I must try. You may have my skates, Honey; if we do get a frost this
winter, I shall never skate again. I wonder if I ought to go to church
every day?"

"You sound as if you're going to die," observed Honey.

"If I was sure it was all right with me, I should like to. I think
directly people are ready for heaven they ought to go there. It is too
tantalizing to be obliged to stay down here seeing other people having
good times, and being out of them oneself. I don't know how I shall do
it, but I'm going to have a try."

Before we left our room in the morning, we always went through the form
of kneeling by our bed for a minute. To-day I felt it was no longer a
form; again I implored for pardon, and asked to be kept straight in the
narrow path that led to life; and then we went down to breakfast.

"If I were you, Li," said Honey on the staircase, "I wouldn't say
anything to the boys about your feelings—not until you are more sure of
yourself. I won't breathe a word."

"I never can keep anything secret long," I said dubiously; "but I'll
have a try."

The boys did not trouble me; they were full of an expedition they had
planned, and this was for all of us to go and see a bachelor uncle of
ours who lived about twelve miles away.

"We'll take him by surprise," said Pat; "I'll hire a trap from the
livery stables round the corner, and drive you girls; and Doodle-doo
and Thunder can come on their bikes. We shall have to start in about an
hour. He is sure to stand us a jolly lunch, and it will be no end of a
spree."

"And who'll pay for the trap?" asked Taters.

"Oh, I'll stand that! I've been saving lately, and you girls must pay
me some of it back when you get your next pocket-money."

It sounded delightful, but I wondered if I ought to go. However, as
nurse seemed to agree to it, only telling Pat to be sure to choose a
quiet horse, I thought I could safely venture.

"And I will have a good read of my Bible when I come home, and say a
few hymns to myself on the way. That will keep me in a religious frame
of mind."

With these resolves, I set off with the others, as lighthearted as
any. Pat was a good driver. When father was at home, he was constantly
driving round the country with him; and now, spinning along the high
road with the fresh keen air blowing full in our faces, our spirits
rose, and I talked more nonsense than any of them.

As we drew near the house, Honey said, "Uncle Bob has never been near
us since we were first taken ill. Suppose he should be afraid of the
infection?"

"That's just the fun of it," laughed Taters; "he won't be able to help
himself, and I'll give him such a hug when I get near him!"

[Illustration: "THAT'S JUST THE FUN OF IT," SAID TATERS.]

"We're out of quarantine," said Pat, rather grandly, "and if the old
chap shows the white feather, I'll soon bring him to reason."

Alas! When we reached the house, the closed shutters told us that he
was away.

"Never mind," said Honey; "Mrs. Sykes will give us lunch."

But this the old housekeeper did not seem disposed to do. She came to
the door in her rustling black silk, and eyed us in stern disapproval.

"Your uncle is away in London for a month. We heard you were all ill of
the scarlet fever. It seems a very unseasonable day for you to be out;
I should think you had better get home as quickly as possible, for I
believe there is a storm coming."

"That we're not going to do before having something to eat," said Pat
determinedly. "Get out, girls; and Sykes will get us some bread and
cheese, if she has nothing else in the house."

In we all trooped, to Mrs. Sykes's great disgust; but she had a meal
prepared for us which we thoroughly enjoyed, and then we spent the rest
of our time rambling over the house and grounds, until Pat said we must
return.

"Give our love to the old chap!" shouted out Doodle-doo, as we were
starting off in style from the front door. "He'll be awfully put out
when he knows he has missed us."

Mrs. Sykes muttered something like "A merciful escape!" and closed the
door sharply in our faces.

But we knew her ways, and only laughed.

[Illustration: "GIVE OUR LOVE TO THE OLD CHAP!" SHOUTED DOODLE-DOO,
 AS WE WERE STARTING OFF IN STYLE.]

We had hardly got a mile away from the house, when down came a torrent
of rain, and a severe storm burst full upon us.

[Illustration]



CHAPTER IV

Telling

NONE of us had umbrellas, and though we girls buttoned up our jackets
and pulled the rugs well over our knees, we got soaked through. And
then, as a vivid flash of lightning flashed upon us, followed by a
deafening clap of thunder, our horse reared, then bolted.

The trap swayed from side to side. Pat muttered between clenched teeth,
"Sit still, and hold your tongues!"

And still as death we sat, gripping hold of the back of the seat, and
expecting every moment to be upset.

[Illustration: OUR HORSE REARED, THEN BOLTED.]

"Am I ready to die?" flashed through my mind; and again I sent up an
agonizing cry,—

   "O God, forgive, and save me!"

We dashed on; the hedges seemed to fly past us; but the road was a
straight and even one. Gradually the horse's pace slackened, and at
last, with a tremendous effort, Pat was able to pull up. Then we looked
at each other. Honey was as white as a sheet; Pat was wiping the
perspiration from his brow; and Taters was the only one who laughed,
but her laugh was an hysterical one.

"A near shave for us!" was Pat's comment.

And not another word did he say till we reached home, for we were all
considerably sobered by our adventure.

I crept away to my room as soon as I could, and thanked God on my
knees for having preserved us. I felt, if He had heard and answered
one prayer, He would another; and I went to bed that night a little
comforted.


The next morning I ran in next door to ask Miss Moffat for a book she
had promised to lend Honey. I found her writing letters in her snug
little sitting-room; but she turned round at once and made me sit down
by the fire and have a chat with her. Somehow or other I soon found
myself telling her all that was in my heart. She had a way of getting
everything out of us, and I could never be reticent with her.

"And do you think you have now got the 'one thing lacking,' my dear?"

"I don't know. What do you say was the one thing lacking with that
young man, Miss Moffat?"

"He lacked union with Christ," Miss Moffat said softly. "He could not
make up his mind to link his life on to our Lord's; and, believe me,
Mary, you will never be able to live a happy Christian life unless you
get in touch with your Saviour."

"I don't think a Christian life can be a happy one," I said gloomily;
"it is life with all the enjoyment taken out of it. But I've promised
to live it, and I can't go back from it."

Miss Moffat looked at me with something like tears in her eyes.

"Oh, child, child, what a wrong start you are making! You say you have
asked God to forgive you and save you. How can He do it, when He has
said no sinner shall come into His presence?"

"I suppose," said I thoughtfully, "He will do it because Christ died
for sinners—Christ died for me."

As I said the words a strange sense of peace crept into my heart.

"Yes," Miss Moffat went on; "you have the right foundation. But if you
have just been received into the fold, and have obtained forgiveness
of sins, and the gift of eternal life—if you have been made an heir of
glory—whom must you thank for it?"

"The Lord Jesus Christ," I said slowly.

"And doesn't your heart glow with the thought of all His love for you?
Have you no word of thanks to Him? You talk as if you are to live a
Christ-like life without Christ! The thing is impossible. Open your
empty little heart to Him, and He will come in and flood your life with
joy and gladness. A Christian life a gloomy one! Oh, how little, how
very little, you know! Get linked on to Christ, my dear; get to know
Him as your personal Friend, and you will find you love Him better
every day you live—ah! And you'll get to understand a little of His
mighty love for you!"

Miss Moffat spoke enthusiastically. I could only stare at her, for her
words then were above and beyond my comprehension.

Then I sighed, though a spark of hope sprang up in my breast.

"Do you think God has answered my prayer?" I asked.

Miss Moffat turned over the leaves of her well-worn Bible.

"'If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins.' Faithful—for He never breaks His word; just—because Christ has
suffered instead of us. What do you think, Mary?"

I did not answer for a minute; then I said, "But I don't feel any
different."

"Let your feelings alone; rest on this verse. Run your finger along it
every day, and say, 'God says this. I'll believe it, though I don't
feel it.' If you keep on at that, the feeling will come. But your
salvation does not depend on your feelings."

I got up to go, and kissed our little friend enthusiastically.

"You're a dear, Miss Moffat! You've comforted me a lot. And you don't
think God wants to take away my pleasures if I'm a Christian?"

Miss Moffat smiled.

"He loves you, my child. He loves to see you happy. He will fill your
life with blessing, if you are willing to let Him."

I walked back to our house thinking. And then a few minutes after I
burst into the schoolroom. The boys were cooking toffee; Taters was
dressing our black cat in a paper frock and cap; and Honey was trying
vainly to write a letter to mother. I flung Honey's book on the table.

"I've something to tell you all!" I said.

[Illustration: I TOOK UP THE SOFA CUSHIONS, AND FLUNG THEM
 WITH ALL MY FORCE AT THE BOYS' HEADS.]

"Hulloo! Anything grand? Why, Li is quite excited! Out with it; your
eyes are nearly starting out of your head!"

I stood erect, and faced them all.

"It's something very good for me. I'm a Christian."

A shout of laughter from the boys.

"Just found that out? What are we? Heathen?"

I was not disconcerted.

"I tell you I'm quite different to what I was a few days ago. I found
out the answer to Miss Moffat's question, and I'm going to be really
and truly religious."

Pat tapped his forehead significantly.

"Poor Li! She has been rather queer the last day or two, but I didn't
think it would come to this!"

"Li pious! If you lived to be a hundred, you couldn't be: so don't you
come here trying to green us!"

Exasperated by these jeers, I took up the sofa cushions—our favourite
implements of warfare—and flung them with all my force at the boys'
heads, exclaiming hotly—

"I am! I don't care what you say, and how you laugh! I know myself
better than you do, and if I choose to be 'pious,' as you call it, I
shall!"

[Illustration]

And then, dashing out of the room, I rushed to our bedroom, and
flinging myself on my bed, burst into tears.



CHAPTER V

Growing

[Illustration] "DINNER, my good woman! It's very easy to tell you what
we should like for dinner. A good seaside one, of course! We'll begin
with scalloped oysters, some broiled mackerel, and boiled cod, with
shrimp sauce, lobster salad—"

"Some starfish jelly, and limpet tart, and crab cream to follow—"

"And seaweed sandwiches and salt-water ices to finish up with!"

Our landlady's face was a picture, as these volleys were fired at her;
and Fräulein turned upon us with a sharp rebuke.

"Go down to the beach, and let me not see you till dinner! You are an
overwhelming torrent when it is business that I wish to talk!"


It was a fortnight later; Fräulein had returned to us at the end of a
week, and, acting upon a letter she had received from our parents, had
brought us all down to a seaside village on the sunny south coast.

It was the beginning of March, early in the year for lodgers; but
we liked the emptiness of the place, and were enjoying ourselves
immensely. I did not find that my spiritual experiences were making
my life less happy. Of course the boys teased me unmercifully. Every
morning they would ask, "Still pious, Li? Isn't the fit over?"

But as they always would tease about something, I did not mind; and
found that I could laugh and joke with them the same as usual. Miss
Moffat helped me a great deal; and I was beginning to like reading my
Bible. Not that I could yet spend a long time over it without becoming
weary; but Miss Moffat told me I must not expect to walk before I could
crawl, and she advised me to read a short portion at a time, thinking
over it, and praying to be taught.

It was a cheering thought to me that God liked to see me happy. I never
could keep grave for long, and my heart being at rest about the future,
and at peace about my sins, made a wonderful difference to me.

This morning, when we had scattered on the beach, and Thunder and I had
taken refuge under a breakwater for a few minutes' rest, he turned to
me and said, "I don't believe you're the genuine article, Li! It's a
sham and delusion!"

"What is?"

[Illustration: "I DON'T BELIEVE YOU'RE THE GENUINE ARTICLE, LI!
 IT'S A SHAM AND DELUSION!"]

"Your Christianity—or conversion—as you call it."

"Why do you think so?"

"Oh, because it hasn't changed you!"

"I hope it has," I said soberly.

"Well, you're just as cheeky as you always were; it hasn't lengthened
your face, or choked the fun out of you."

"I hope it never will; but it has made a lot of difference to me
inside. I'm not afraid of God any more. I feel I belong to Him, and am
getting to love Him. I think it's a very jolly thing to be a Christian,
and I wish you would be one too."

Thunder gave a short laugh. "It's well enough for girls; but if you
were at a public school, as we are, you'd know a fellow couldn't be
religious. There are a few who try it on, but they're in their own set,
and are too slow for words!"

"Well," said I quickly, "it's their own stupidity if it makes them
slow; it isn't religion!"

We were interrupted here by the breathless arrival of Doodle-doo and
Taters.

"Hi! You two, come on! We're going out for a sail!"

I was on my feet instantly, and down at the water's edge the next
minute, where Pat was holding a parley with the boatman, whose smart
little craft lay by.

"Now, look here, my good fellow," Pat was saying, "I wasn't born
yesterday, and there won't be room for you. We either have the boat to
ourselves, or we chuck up the sail altogether! Take your choice!"

"I say!" I said aside to Honey. "The boys aren't going to take us out
after what Fräulein said?"

"Oh, bother Fräulein," said Honey: "she's such an old fuss! Pat has
managed a sailing-boat before this."

[Illustration: "I'M NOT COMING," I SAID, DRAWING BACK.]

I was silent. It was a bright, sunny morning, and I longed to go. Yet
only yesterday Fräulein had positively forbidden us girls to go in a
sailing-boat without a proper boatman; and though I had not a particle
of fear myself, my conscience was becoming more tender, and I felt we
ought not to disobey her. Pat, meanwhile, had overruled the boatman's
objections, and was marshalling us carefully into the boat.

"I'm not coming," I said, drawing back. "You know we've been forbidden;
and we could go for a row just as easy; Fräulein doesn't mind that."

"Don't be a little fool!" was his quick rejoinder. "Old Fräu will have
forgotten she gave such an order when she sees us back safe and sound!
What has made you so unusually squeamish?"

"It's her pious fit!" cried Doodle-doo. "Let the little dear alone!
She's going to be a naughty girl no more!"

"Come on; don't make an ass of yourself!" said Thunder, tugging hold
of my arm as he spoke. "Weren't you saying just now that your religion
wouldn't turn you into a molly-coddle?"

"Are you afraid?" laughed Taters, already taking a seat in the boat.

It was my first battle. Strangely enough, up to now nothing had
happened to put my religion to the test.

"I'm not afraid," I said slowly, looking wistfully at the boat; "but
you're right—my religion won't let me go. I must be left behind."

It seemed rather hard lines to me; but they were all so excited about
getting off that they did not waste time in persuasion.

[Illustration: IN PLAYING WITH PIXIE I FORGOT MY TROUBLE.]

Pat called out, "Go back to old Fräu, and tell her of the wickedness
of her pupils! In Sunday-school books we should all be drowned as a
punishment! You and she had better watch on the beach for our bodies to
be washed ashore!"

I watched them go with tears in my eyes. Oh, it was hard sometimes to
be good! Why were forbidden things so nice?

And then Pixie came running up to me, and in playing with him I forgot
my trouble. We built sand castles, and destroyed them; and then, tired
out, I sat down on the shingle, and Pixie threw himself upon me.

"Tell me a story, Li, 'bout one of those little ships that go away
right into the sky. Pixie would like to go out in a ship with a big
knife, and cut away all those dull old clouds that hide the blue sky."

It was nearly dinner-time when the sailing-boat returned. All were in
high spirits, laughing at me for having missed such fun.

But when we got back to our lodgings, Fräulein was very angry, and kept
Honey and Taters indoors for the rest of the afternoon.

"Oh, we're a bad lot!" said Pat, listening to Fräulein's scolding
with the greatest equanimity. "But you're going to have one saint
amongst your pupils now, who will comfort and cheer your heart! Old
Li's wicked days are over! Don't you see the difference in her face?
A kind of what-a-good-girl-am-I smirk in the corner of her mouth; a
what-a-wicked-set-I-live-amongst twist one side of her nose; and a
oh-how-frivolous-is-earth roll in the whites of her eyes!"

I got up and inspected myself in the mirror over the fireplace.

"I wish I could see a change," I said; "it's the one thing that doesn't
look religious about me; but Miss Moffat's face isn't a religious
one—that's my comfort!"



CHAPTER VI

Working

[Illustration] I HAD some ups and downs after this, but I was quickly
corrected if I made a slip; the others seemed to keep a lynx-eyed watch
on every word and movement, and if it had not been for Miss Moffat's
letter, I really think I should have got thoroughly disheartened. She
said in it,—

   "Don't think you won't tumble, my dear; young feet are very uncertain.
But when you've fallen, let the Lord pick you up again; He won't lose
patience with you."

Some days were records of failure on failure; but I was beginning to
find prayer a great comfort, and, to my great delight, I was feeling a
warm love filling my heart for the One who had done, and was doing, so
much for me.

"It's a great comfort, Honey," I said one morning, as we were dressing
in our bedroom, "that fresh days keep coming. How dreadful if we had
one long eternal day with no break!"

"Why?" she asked.

"Because it gives one a fresh start. Now, yesterday, you know how I
went on; I lost my temper with Taters, was rude to Fräulein, and ended
by being sent off to bed an hour earlier for having that row with Pat,
and smashing our landlady's hideous lamp in the hall! Well, to-day I'm
starting again, quite fresh and jolly!"

"You're an awfully queer Christian," said Honey. "I don't believe
you're a proper one."

"So you always say; but I can't be perfect all at once—Miss Moffat says
I can't. Do you think I am getting on a little bit?"

I added this rather pleadingly, and Honey responded warmly, "You're
a brick! The boys say so, though they do tease you so. Pat said
yesterday he would never have given you credit for so much pluck and
perseverance. I'm sure you're as happy as any of us, and not a bit
priggish, so far."

"Then," said I, a little shyly, "I wish you'd try it too, Honey. I've
been reading in my Bible to-day about the disciples following Jesus,
and the one who went to the other and said, 'Come and see.' I wish you
would 'come and see,' Honey!"

[Illustration: HONEY WAS FASTENING HER COLLAR.]

Honey didn't answer. She was fastening her collar, which didn't seem to
meet without a great deal of tugging, and her face grew red.

"I'll wait and see how you go on first," she said. "I've thought a lot
lately, and if you can be religious, I don't see why I couldn't; but I
shan't do anything yet."

I felt very pleased at this, and from that time asked God in my prayers
to make Honey decide to serve Him. She was always much more gentle and
thoughtful than I was; and I often told her she would find it much
easier than I did.

The time at the seaside went much quicker than it did at home. We
were out nearly all day long, and we explored the country for miles
round. Fräulein was the only one who felt dull; she loved the town
with all the shops and people; and then, too, she was always having
the disagreeable duty of having to act as peacemaker between us and
our landlady, who vowed she had never before had such a noisy set of
lodgers. The boys and she were at daggers drawn, and I really think she
would have liked to turn us out, if it had not been the empty time of
year.

On Sunday morning we heard a sermon that made a great impression
on me. We went to a little country church, and I liked the simple
old-fashioned service there. The text we had was:

   "'As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one to
another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.'"

The vicar said a lot about Christians being so lazy and careless as
they were, and not working for God; and he showed us that God would
have no idle stewards on His property. It made me feel very ashamed of
myself, when I remembered that for nearly four weeks I had known about
and received this gift from God, and yet I had never tried to pass the
good news on to any one. And when I came home I determined that I would
try harder than ever to get Honey to join me; and after I had got her,
I would try for Thunder.

But, beyond promising to read a few verses from the Bible with me every
morning, Honey still resisted my persuasion.

"There's plenty of time, Li. I don't feel my sins a burden, as you did,
and I'm getting rather tired of your preaches. Leave me alone. I mean
to be religious some day, but not yet."

One morning Thunder and I had been for a long ramble along the shore,
when, coming back, we saw a great commotion on the beach. We found
Fräulein jabbering away in excited German to several fishermen, and
nurse rushing backwards and forwards looking quite demented, whilst Pat
and the others were talking at the top of their voices, and all were
looking anxious and scared.

We were soon told what had happened; Pixie was lost, and the general
fear was that he had drifted out to sea in a boat.

Honey was the last one with him; she was lying in a boat tied up on the
beach reading a book, when he came and joined her. Now, when Honey read
a story-book she always got so engrossed in it that she never noticed
anything going on about her. Pixie played about, talking to himself,
and she remembers seeing him twisting and untwisting the rope, and
saying something about wanting to sail away to the sky, but she did not
take much notice of it at the time. She left him soon after, for a few
minutes, whilst she went to exchange her book with one that Taters had,
and when she came back no Pixie was to be seen. She was not alarmed,
for she concluded nurse had come to fetch him indoors, and it was only
just before we came up that they discovered that Pixie was missing.

[Illustration: WE FOUND FRÄULEIN JABBERING AWAY IN EXCITED GERMAN
 TO SEVERAL FISHERMEN.]

"And not only is he gone," said Honey tearfully, turning to me, "but
the boat is missing! He must have undone the rope, and the tide has
come in, and he must have drifted out to sea!"

I looked anxiously out on the ocean. It was a calm day, and a few
fishing-smacks were going out to sea, but there was no sign of a boat
anywhere.

"We must do something," said Pat, with energy, "and the sooner we set
to work the better. We shall not be likely to find him after dark. If
he has drifted out to sea, we must follow."

And in an incredibly short time, he and Doodle-doo, Thunder and a
stalwart boatman, were rowing out in the direction they thought the
boat might have gone.

[Illustration]



[Illustration]

CHAPTER VII

Praying

I DON'T think I ever remember a more miserable day than it was after
Pixie was missing. Honey was inconsolable; the boys returned late at
night, tired out, and thoroughly disheartened at their unsuccessful
search; Fräulein and nurse were dissolved in tears, and both seemed
perfectly helpless to make any suggestions.

"He may have been picked up by some steamer or fishing-smack," I said,
trying to speak hopefully.

"I know he is drowned!" wailed Honey.

"And it will be your doing!" said Pat severely. "You left a baby in an
open boat, with the tide coming in around him; and when you found he
had disappeared you never troubled yourself, or told any one for a full
hour after!"

Honey was too miserable to defend herself. Pixie was the darling of us
all, and the boys were too alarmed to show any mercy. I tried to cheer
her up, and then was assailed with—

"Oh, do shut up with your 'hopes' and 'perhaps,' Li! Your grins are as
bad as Honey's snivels. I suppose you think a saint ought to show a
stony front at a time like this!"

[Illustration: "HERE I IS, AND A BIG FISH."]

"I'm not going to imagine the worst, to please you," I said stoutly;
"for I've been praying for Pixie ever since he was missing, and I
believe God will send him back to us again."

"Cant!" muttered Doodle-doo; but Honey whispered—

"If God answers your prayer, Li, I'll become a Christian, like you."

And then, about half-past ten, when Fräulein was urging us to go to
bed, and Pat had just returned from visiting the coastguard station on
the cliff, we heard a knock at the door, and a rush of small feet along
the passage.

"Hear I is, and a big fish for my supper! And Pixie saw a lot of fish
caught in a net!" He marched in amongst us, his hat on the back of
his head, hugging a slippery fish in his arms, which he deposited in
triumph on Fräulein's lap. A fisherman followed him in, and explained
that he had found him in the boat drifting out to sea, as we had
feared, and had taken him on board his smack.

"The coolest little chap I h'ever set eyes on! Said he was going to
touch the sky, and warn't half pleased at havin' to come back without
a-doin' it."

Pixie could not understand the reason for such hugs and embraces as he
received, and no one had the heart to scold him, until nurse said—

"And don't you think it was very naughty to go off in a boat like that,
and give us all such a fright?"

Pixie looked round on us serenely.

"The boat ran away hisself. Pixie only sat quite still and bumped up
and down."

"Weren't you frightened when you got out to sea?" asked Taters.

He shook his curly head. "O' course I wasn't. When the boat jumped up
and down very high, I asked Jesus to come in and sit by me; and I fink
he did. And I asked Jesus to take me frough the sky into heaven; but
this man broughted me back before I got there. And Pixie is very tired,
and he'll go to bed, and have the fish for his breakfus!"

Nurse carried him off, and we all followed his example; but before we
got into bed, I said to Honey—

"Don't you feel very thankful Pixie is safe?"

"I should think I did! It's like a mountain's weight off me!"

"Well, then, aren't you going to do what you said!"

Honey looked doubtfully at me. "Yes, I really will, but not to-night;
I'm too tired."

I lost patience with her. "You put off and off; and you'll never do
it! I hate such shilly-shallying! Why can't you make up your mind one
way or the other? Say downright you don't mean to change, instead of
pretending you want to, and never doing it! I'm sick of your saying
that 'by-and-by' you'll do it! If you don't take care, you'll put it
off till too late, and then where will you be? You're as weak as water!"

"Thank you!" said Honey placidly, though I could tell by her face she
was angry. "And you're a hypocrite if your temper can flare up over
nothing so!"

I dashed into bed, and worked off my indignation under the bedclothes.

A quarter of an hour later, thoroughly ashamed of myself, I sprang up
and went over to Honey's bed.

"I'm awfully sorry," I said penitently; "do forgive me! But you don't
know how I long for you to be as happy as I am; and I'm so afraid you
will never do it unless you make a start now. God has been so good in
preserving Pixie's life."

Honey was not demonstrative—none of us were—but she gave my arm a
squeeze.

"All right, Li! I don't really think you a hypocrite, but don't give me
up yet. I really will start soon, but not to-night; and I have thanked
God for sending Pixie back—I really have."

I crept back into bed a little comforted, and then I determined that
I would pray three or four times every day that Honey and Thunder
might become true Christians. "If God can answer one prayer, He will
another," I argued; "and I expect He would much rather have them
Christians than save Pixie from drowning; for I should think He would
be glad to have such a darling in heaven!"

And so I prayed, and waited, and wondered why God did not answer my
prayer sooner; for both Honey and Thunder seemed, in my eyes, to be as
far off as ever.

"A letter from your mother!" said Fräulein one morning. "And we home
shall go at once. The workmen have papered and washed the house, and
your father and mother are also returning quickly."

I seized hold of Doodle-doo and spun him round and round the table in
delight—

"Hurray! We've been here long enough. When shall we go? To-day?"

"I'll tell old Skim-milk, and see her face when she hears the news!"

And Doodle-doo rushed from the room to break the tidings to our
landlady, whom we had nicknamed "Skim-milk" from the poverty of that
article when brought to our table.

[Illustration: "THE HOUSE OF THE FATTEST OLD FURY THAT EVER LIVED
 ON THE BEST TITBITS OF HER LODGERS!"]

He returned chuckling.

"What did she say?" we demanded.

"She tossed up the tip of her nose. 'A blessed thing for me, afore my
carpets get wored to rags, and my paint scratched off, and my house
gets the name in the Terrace of containin' the vulgarest, noisiest,
impertinentest set of children, big enough to know better!'"

"And what did you say?"

"I was very solemn. 'Do you know what name your house has got? The
house of the fattest old fury that ever lived on the best titbits
of her lodgers, and pried into their pockets and drawers for odd
halfpence!' Then she looked round for a broomstick, and I walked off!"



CHAPTER VIII

Reaping

WE were glad to get home. I think we were getting tired of our long
holidays, and were not sorry when the day was fixed for the boys to go
back to school after the Easter holidays.

And we all enjoyed having father and mother back again. Mother was a
great invalid, but she was always ready to help and listen to any of
us, if we went to her with our troubles; and father spoilt us all—so
Fräulein and nurse said. He was always ready to take us sightseeing
about London, and we were never tired of accompanying him.

The evening before the boys went back to school we were having a small
farewell gathering. We always had them every quarter, and cook used to
make us a huge iced cake with "farewell" in pink letters all round it,
which we much appreciated.

Miss Moffat was with us, and so was Uncle Bob, and we spent the evening
in games and merriment. It was during some dumb charades, with which we
were winding up, that Thunder and I were alone for a few minutes. I had
been longing to say something to him before he went back to school, and
now this seemed the opportunity.

"You'll write to me, won't you, Thun?"

"Don't I always?"

"And, Thun, will you try what I have tried?"

Thunder looked at me for a moment without speaking, then he said
gruffly—

"I have."

"Oh, when? How splendid!"

"A week or two ago."

"And have you really started? Oh, Thunder, you might have told me!"

"I meant to; but you know how hard it is to talk. I've been watching
you, and I felt I was all wrong. I think I'm on the right track now,
only it's the life at school I dread. You might, you know, pray for me,
Li, when I'm gone."

No more would he say, and I was so overcome that tears crowded to my
eyes. It seemed too good to be true, and yet it was only the answer
to my prayers. I knew Thunder was too thoughtful and thorough to be
anything but real. He always had held on doggedly to anything that he
had taken up, and, as Miss Moffat would say, he would have unseen power
to help him along; so I had not much fear for his future.

[Illustration: "OH, WHEN? HOW SPLENDID!"]

"Why, Mary, you're sunshine itself!" said Miss Moffat to me later that
evening. "What makes you so radiant?"

I gave her a good squeeze. "Thunder," I said.

She understood, for she raised her eyebrows, and then nodded and smiled.

Just before she left us, when I was putting on her cloak in the hall, I
whispered—

"Isn't it lovely? But I wish it was Honey."

Miss Moffat smiled. "Pray and work for her, dear child."

The boys went. We girls settled down to a very quiet routine of lessons
with Fräulein, and felt dull after our long time of idleness and
dissipation. And so the spring wore on and summer came, and still Honey
wavered and said "By-and-by" when I talked to her.

One lovely summer's afternoon we were gathering round the schoolroom
table with black looks. It had been a trying day; Fräulein had a
headache, and was unusually fidgety and cross, and the heat and
confinement had made us careless and idle. After dinner Fräulein went
to rest in her room, leaving us each so many French exercises to write
out as impositions, and forbidding us to leave the schoolroom till we
had finished them.

"It's a beastly shame!" cried Taters, stamping her foot in anger when
Fräulein had departed. "And I'm not going to do mine. Look!"

And taking up her exercise-book, naughty Taters deliberately tore it to
pieces and scattered the fragments out of the open window.

We were rather aghast at this proceeding, for Fräulein was not a person
to be trifled with.

"You're a little silly," Honey said; "it will only be worse for you in
the end."

"It's too bad of Fräulein," I grumbled. "If I was a governess with a
headache, I would give fewer lessons to my pupils, not more."

"Even a saint can grumble!" said Taters, mockingly, and then she ran
out of the room.

We heard her whistling on the staircase, and then suddenly there was an
awful crash, a piercing shriek, and dead silence.

[Illustration]

Honey and I rushed to the door, and I shall never forget the moment
when, looking over the balusters, we saw Taters—a confused heap in the
hall below. She had been sliding on the rails, a forbidden pastime, and
in some way or other had overbalanced herself.

Mother rushed from her room, and was the first to lift her up; the
servants and Fräulein crowded round, and then nurse came up and drew us
into the nursery.

Honey was as white as death, and shaking like a leaf. "She isn't dead,
nurse! Oh, she can't be dead!"

"Pray God she mayn't be!" responded nurse. And she left us with Pixie,
while she went to give her help.

Our doctor came almost immediately, and there were hushed voices and
footsteps all the evening. We were told when we went to bed that Taters
was alive, but she had broken an arm, and concussion of the brain was
feared.


For weeks she lay between life and death. Honey and I were too
miserable for words. And I kept praying in my heart, "O God, heal her;
let her live—save her!"

But at last she began to recover, and the first day that we heard the
good news from nurse, "The doctor says she'll do nicely now," Honey
turned to me with earnest resolve in her face—

"Li, I've been fighting against God and holding back all this time. Now
I will give myself up to Him. I want to be a Christian like you. I have
been miserable about myself ever since you altered so. Tell me what to
do."

I tried to tell her, but somehow it was not very easy until I got hold
of my Bible, and then that made it clear. I made her look at "Him that
cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out."

And then she said, "That will do, Li," and left the room.

I did not go near her, but put up a tiny prayer to God that He would
take her as I felt He had taken me, and again I thanked Him for
answered prayer.

It was some days before Honey felt sure of herself, but at last she
seemed to get the peace of mind she was wanting.

"It is so good of God to have been so patient with me," she said. "I
believe if Taters had not been nearly killed, I should never have made
up my mind; but I never felt before how quickly we could die. Oh, Li,
suppose Taters had been killed on the spot!"

I shuddered. "God has saved her," I said, "and now we must pray for
her. I should like her to start too. Wouldn't it be splendid if we
three were all of the same mind before the boys came back from their
holidays?"

Taters was much impressed during her illness, but she disappointed us
when she was well again, for she seemed more thoughtless than ever.

Miss Moffat comforted me when I talked it over with her, by saying,
"God has been good in letting you reap two of your family, my child. Go
on praying and working, and remember, with you young people, that the
life tells more than the words."

"And I suppose it teaches us to be patient and persevering in prayer!"

Miss Moffat nodded and smiled. "'Let us not be weary in well doing: for
in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.'"



                            THE END



                          PRINTED BY
                 HAZELL, WATSON, AND VINEY, LD.
                     LONDON AND AYLESBURY.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A THOUGHTLESS SEVEN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


