The Project Gutenberg eBook of The strange career of the Chevalier d'Eon de Beaumont
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The strange career of the Chevalier d'Eon de Beaumont
        Minister plenipotentiary from France to Great Britain in 1763

Author: J. Buchan Telfer

Release date: March 20, 2025 [eBook #75668]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Longmans, Green, and Co, 1885

Credits: Super Queer Historian and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STRANGE CAREER OF THE CHEVALIER D'EON DE BEAUMONT ***





THE CHEVALIER D’EON DE BEAUMONT

LONDON: PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE AND PARLIAMENT
STREET

[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE.

LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON.

1782.

From a Painting in the possession of CHARLES LISTON, Esq. (LATE THE
PROPERTY OF CHARLES READE.)

_See Appendix._]




                                   THE
                              STRANGE CAREER
                                  OF THE
                       CHEVALIER D’EON DE BEAUMONT

          MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY FROM FRANCE TO GREAT BRITAIN
                                 IN 1763

                                    BY
                      CAPTAIN J. BUCHAN TELFER, R.N.
                             F.S.A., F.R.G.S.
        AUTHOR OF ‘THE CRIMEA AND TRANSCAUCASIA’ ‘THE BONDAGE AND
                   TRAVELS OF JOHANN SCHILTBERGER’ ETC.

    ‘L’homme d’esprit a dans sa plume un juge toujours prêt à le
    venger des affronts qu’on lui fait’—D’EON

                       With Portraits and Facsimile

                                  LONDON
                         LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
                                   1885

                          _All rights reserved_




A LA VILLE DE TONNERRE




PREFACE.


The Secret Correspondence established by Louis XV. in 1750-1752,
originally for the purpose of gratifying the Prince de Conti’s ambition
for sovereignty, in the interests of Poland, and of securing the alliance
and co-operation of several of the smaller Powers, against the aggression
of Austria and Russia, proved, in course of years, of inestimable benefit
to the King, personally. Insuperable timidity, and the consciousness
of a lack of self-confidence, were weaknesses that ill-befitted an
absolute monarch, for Louis XV. could never summon courage to confront
his ministers. The Chevalier D’Eon de Beaumont very tersely portrays the
besetting sin of his sovereign, where he describes it as a deficiency
in the needed strength of character to control, as became a king, his
ministers and ambassadors, all of whom he mistrusted and avoided, making
reparation in secret for the follies they committed publicly. ‘Après nous
le déluge’ are the well-known words of comfort offered by the Marquise
de Pompadour, into whose hands the direction of affairs was lapsing,
when seeing the King sorely oppressed with grief upon learning the news
of the disaster at Rosbach; and perhaps it is true that the secret
correspondence, of the existence of which the favourite was entirely
ignorant, was useful in averting the coming storm during the term of his
reign. Selfish and self-indulgent almost beyond conception, Louis XV. had
no spirit to grapple with difficulties where they presented themselves,
except in regard to the relations of France with Foreign Powers, when he
could perfectly well rouse himself to action; not openly, lest the views
of his ministers should be in opposition to his desires, but covertly
and frequently to their confusion. It was the duty of the secret agents
at the several capitals of Europe, who were always connected in some
way with his Embassies, to keep his Majesty informed of all that was
passing, and it became his custom to instruct them to bring about the
realisation of his policy, regardless of the directions of his ministers.
Louis XV. took an interest and a delight in foreign affairs, therefore to
him the secret correspondence had its uses; otherwise—it was leading to
destruction.

One of the earliest and most remarkable of the King’s secret agents,
for his employment as such dated from the year 1754 or 1755, was D’Eon
de Beaumont, who, as a diplomatist, evinced spirit equal to that of
Lord Whitworth under circumstances that have passed into history, and
exhibited much of the bravery and daring of the famous Hugh Elliot,
without, however, the similar advantage of being enabled to deal all his
blows by the light of day, his training from youth having been in the
direction rather of intrigue.

Since no history of Louis XV. can have any pretensions to completeness if
the name of D’Eon de Beaumont be excluded, it is not a little surprising
that the individual acts, as well as the official services of so
extraordinary a personage have never been brought together before the
world. This blank the author endeavours to fill.

In 1836, Gaillardet published a memoir of the Chevalier D’Eon,
meretricious and spurious in its details, which speedily reached a
second edition, and attained a popularity that caused it to be pirated
and reproduced, very extensively, in ‘Un Hermaphrodite,’ Louis Jourdan
indiscreetly lending his name for its authorship! Although Gaillardet
announced that his book was produced out of material supplied by the
D’Eon family at Tonnerre, its contents proved to be in great measure
scandalous fabrications. Feeling himself, as he advanced in years, called
upon to make some kind of reparation, this author gave, in 1866, a new
edition under the title ‘Mémoires sur la Chevalière D’Eon. La Vérité sur
les Mystères de sa Vie,’ in the preface to which, styled ‘Un Acte de
Contrition, &c.,’ he candidly avows that his first edition was in great
part a fiction. In this later edition Gaillardet reproduces, together
with other interesting matter, numerous documents that are preserved
at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, where, by rare good fortune, he
obtained permission to search the archives; and that so distinguished an
academician as the Duke de Broglie (familiar to Englishmen as having been
first minister in the Conservative days of the French Republic), as well
as other well-known authors, should have availed themselves of this work,
may be accepted as sufficient guarantee of its worth and reliability. As
becomes a conscientious biographer, Gaillardet allows the documents he
produces to speak for themselves, without himself undertaking to pass
judgment on his subject; a safe course adopted in the following pages,
where scrupulous care is taken to authenticate all that is adduced.

In his engaging work, ‘Le Secret du Roi,’ the Duke de Broglie treats at
some length on the part taken by D’Eon in the secret correspondence of
Louis XV. Unhappily, the Duke seems desirous of avenging the agony of
mind his ancestor the Count de Broglio must have endured, upon certain
occasions of the threatening attitude assumed by the Chevalier, and he
evidently finds it impossible to forgive the Minister Plenipotentiary,
D’Eon, for being more clever, abler, and readier-witted than the French
Ambassador with whom it was his misfortune to be connected; for his
Grace takes frequent occasion to traduce him, and calls attention
to his ‘assertions mensongères,’ without clearly substantiating the
grave charges—a hard measure where the person assailed is beyond the
possibility of vindicating the accusation. The fact is that D’Eon related
unpleasant truths, and exposed startling facts, as will be manifested in
due course.

Few persons, in all probability, have left behind them so much matter in
MS. as did the Chevalier D’Eon, if we except perhaps the Duke of Berwick
and the noted Saint-Simon, of whom Chateaubriand said: ‘... il avait
heureusement un tour à lui; il écrivit à la diable pour l’immortalité.’
Like Saint-Simon, the Chevalier sketched admirable portraits, and like
Saint-Simon too, he commenced in early youth to write his impressions,
keeping to himself, through life, all he had written. There is
evidence, amongst the papers the author has consulted, that D’Eon never
contemplated an autobiography. ‘It has ever been my opinion,’ he wrote,
‘and I am even persuaded, that it is impossible for an author to write
a just history of his own life; for he is either lifted to the height
of vanity by pride so inseparable from the human heart, or else feigned
modesty debases him to hypocritical humility. There are, at Versailles,
public depôts of the Ministries for War and for Foreign Affairs, and
Louis XV. has left his private papers of the Secret Correspondence. It
is there that the faithful historian should seek the truth if he has the
courage to tell it.’ Unfortunately, there is reason for apprehending that
many MSS., some of consequence, are lost. Père Elisée, the Chevalière’s
medical attendant, had a large number of his papers, which were seen in
the possession of M. Nicolas de Chenart, about the years 1824-1828, by
a correspondent, in ‘Notes and Queries.’ They may now possibly form a
part or the whole of the collection of D’Eon MSS. at the British Museum,
and at Tonnerre where they are numerous. Another large portion passed
into the hands of Mr. Christie, to whom the Chevalière was indebted for
many favours. The first and last of these collections have been well
sifted by the author, the chief difficulty experienced being the making a
judicious selection. It was quite possible to have enlarged on the acts
and writings of the Chevalier or Chevalière D’Eon, by the introduction
of additional portraits, anecdotes, and letters of interest, but—happy
is the biographer who escapes the charge of tedious prolixity! The
author feels that although the material at his disposal has been greatly
condensed, the thread of the narrative is maintained in its completeness,
without the omission of any incident of importance in the life of the
most singular and of one of the most extraordinary individuals of the
last century.

There can be no exaggeration in the assertion that the life of the
Chevalier or Chevalière D’Eon de Beaumont is unique in the history of the
world. At any rate, the author is prepared to confess his ignorance of
any record of its equal.

Cases of females having occupied the position of men, whether for a
limited period or during their entire existence, are without number,
striking instances of both, within the recollection of the present
generation, being those of Captain (Marie Jeanne) Dubois, who served in
Napoleon’s Russian campaign, and of a medical officer in the service
of Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen, who have passed away of late
years. Upon the other hand, few men have disguised themselves as females,
the most notable example of the kind, perhaps, being that afforded
by the Comtesse des Barres, who for thirty years led a dissolute and
discreditable life, but was perfectly well known to be the Abbé de
Choisy. The biographer of this creature, Thoulier d’Olivet, says of
him: ‘But what sort of a hero is he whose portrait I am to describe?
A Court Abbé? ... what do I say? A Court Abbé! A coquette who had one
thousand times greater taste for beauty spots and ribbons, one thousand
times more the desire to please, than any professional coquette. It
may be said that Nature made a mistake, and that it was her intention
to create a female;’ then, quoting a lady’s estimate of the Abbé: ‘...
male or female, ever carrying matters to extremes, whether absorbed
in studies or in trifles. Deserving of esteem, because of undaunted
courage, contemptible because of the coquetry of a young maiden, and in
whichever character, at all times engaged in the pursuit of pleasure.’
The Chevalier D’Eon, whose ambiguity of sex was suggested in infancy
and maintained until death, cannot be classed with either of the above.
Female or male, D’Eon appeared as either in obedience to command, having
done good service to King and Country, and we have the authority of John
Britton, who was in the habit of meeting the Chevalière almost daily,
during a period of three years, that she was respectable and respected,
and of refined manners. The uncertainty of her sex occupied every mind.
In branding the tale of Pope Joan as being _false_ and deserving the
name, Gibbon shows himself to be at fault with regard to D’Eon. ‘... I
would not pronounce it (the tale) incredible. Suppose a famous French
chevalier of our own times to have been born in Italy, and educated in
the Church instead of in the army; _her_ merit or fortune _might_ have
raised her to St. Peter’s chair; her amours would have been natural....’

D’Eon’s immediate ancestors were in the habit, it would appear, of
writing their family name, Déon. Upon being accredited Resident, and
afterwards Minister Plenipotentiary at the Court of Great Britain, Louis
XV. was pleased to distinguish the Chevalier’s name by substituting E
for e, changing Déon to D’Eon, orthography the author has observed with
reference to the Chevalier. Late in life, the Chevalière wrote her name,
occasionally d’Eon, at other times D’eon, until the French Revolution,
when, for a season, her signature appears as Déon, bearing the prefix, La
Citoyenne Geneviève.

In concluding these introductory remarks, the author has one pleasant
duty left, that of offering his acknowledgments to Mr. JAMES H. B.
CHRISTIE, of Framingham, Norwich, and King Street, St. James’, and of
expressing his obligations to that gentleman for the liberality and
freedom with which he has been permitted to consult the interesting MSS.,
short of which it would have been simply impossible to produce, in its
present form, the account of this Strange Career.

    LONDON, _December, 1884_.




CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

                               CHAPTER I.

    Birth of D’Eon de Beaumont and registry as a male
    child—Parentage—Consecrated to the Virgin Mary and admitted
    to the Sisterhood—Pursues studies as a boy—Early display
    of abilities—As secret agent, is sent to Russia by Louis
    XV.—Reception at St. Petersburg—Enemies and friends—Leaves for
    Versailles—Invited to enter the service of Russia                    1

                               CHAPTER II.

    Sir Hanbury Williams and Count Woronzoff—The Empress
    Elizabeth’s message to France—Chevalier Douglas, French Chargé
    d’Affaires in Russia, with D’Eon as Secretary—Commencement
    of the Seven Years’ War—Count Apraxin’s defection—D’Eon
    leaves for Versailles—Trait of character—Reception by Louis
    XV. and Ministers—Proceeds to Russia—The will of Peter the
    Great—Bestoujeff’s opinion of D’Eon—Poniatovsky and his
    diamond—D’Eon as a fencer—Bestoujeff’s arrest—D’Eon again
    invited to take service in Russia                                   18

                              CHAPTER III.

    Progress of the war—The Duke de Choiseul’s designs against
    England—Change of policy—D’Eon’s advice to the French
    Ambassador—Approved by Louis XV.—D’Eon’s failing health—The
    Marquis de l’Hôpital—Baron de Breteuil admitted to the secret
    correspondence—The King’s secret orders to D’Eon—Testimonies
    to his abilities—Leaves Russia for the last time—Gift
    from the Empress—On the staff of the Marshal and Count
    de Broglio—Distinguished services during the campaign of
    1761—Exile of the de Broglios—Death of Elizabeth                    36

                               CHAPTER IV.

    Portrait of Catherine II.—Her opinion of D’Eon and
    its fidelity—Portrait of Lord Sandwich—Of the Duke de
    Nivernois—D’Eon Secretary of Embassy in London—Two ‘smart
    pieces of work’—Kindness to French prisoners—Treaty of
    Peace with England—D’Eon takes the ratifications to
    Versailles—Delight of King and Ministers—The Marquise de
    Pompadour—The Count de Guerchy nominated Ambassador at St.
    James’—The Duke de Praslin’s estimate of his qualities—The Duke
    tests D’Eon’s loyalty towards himself—The Prince de Soubise at
    Villinghausen—D’Eon’s respect for the de Broglios—Is invested
    with the Cross of Saint Louis                                       56

                               CHAPTER V.

    D’Eon becomes Resident and Chargé d’Affaires at the British
    Court—Also the King’s special secret agent—Plans for the
    invasion of England—Nicknames to secret correspondents—Louis
    XV.’s letter to D’Eon on the survey of England—De Pompadour
    discovers the secret correspondence—The King’s vexation—D’Eon
    advanced to be Minister Plenipotentiary—How he received his
    new honours—De Broglio’s anxiety for the safety of the King’s
    papers—De Pompadour’s conspiracy to ruin D’Eon—Claims against
    the Crown—Letter of State in favour of D’Eon                        73

                               CHAPTER VI.

    D’Eon charged with extravagance at the Embassy—Irritating
    correspondence—Influx of French visitors—Odious proposal
    to D’Eon—Is to return to subordinate duties on being
    superseded—His remonstrances—The Earl of Hertford—The Count
    de Guerchy’s arrival in England, and D’Eon’s letters of
    recall—Secret despatch from Louis XV.—Official recall on the
    plea of mental alienation—Disregard of the Ministerial orders       90

                              CHAPTER VII.

    D’Eon’s interview with the Earl of Halifax—Refuses to surrender
    the King’s papers to de Guerchy—Declines to take leave of
    the King of England—A scene at the French Embassy—Another at
    Lord Halifax’s residence—A third at D’Eon’s—Summoned by a
    magistrate—De Guerchy’s hostile measures—D’Eon is dangerously
    drugged at the table of the French Ambassador—Designs against
    his liberty—Removes to Brewer Street, Golden Square—Childishly
    annoyed—His extradition demanded—Warned to that effect by Louis
    XV                                                                 109

                              CHAPTER VIII.

    Refusal of the British Government to deliver D’Eon—A force
    organised to kidnap him—Mines and garrisons his house against
    intrusion—De Guerchy reports to Louis XV. his failure to obtain
    the secret papers—D’Eon’s letter to his mother—Publication
    of official and private letters of Ministers, Ambassadors,
    &c.—Consternation produced in consequence—Applies to enter the
    service of a foreign State—Appeals to de Broglio and Tercier on
    his situation—A conciliatory letter the result                     127

                               CHAPTER IX.

    D’Eon’s intricate situation—Popular indignation in England at
    the late peace—Letter of gratitude to Louis XV.; of reproach
    to the Count de Broglio—Sued for libel—Retains the King’s
    papers as security for his person—Illegal proceedings on the
    part of the French Ambassador—Out-of-door precautions against
    being kidnapped—English sympathy for D’Eon—Is found guilty of
    libel, absconds, is searched after, and outlawed—Confession of
    Treyssac de Vergy—De Guerchy’s charge against de Vergy             150

                               CHAPTER X.

    D’Eon challenges the French Ambassador—Institutes legal
    proceedings against him—Strong appeal to the Count de
    Broglio, and indifference of the latter—De Guerchy _v._
    De Vergy—De Vergy’s affidavits—Secret correspondence in
    danger—Undignified conduct of Louis XV., who ‘feels he is in
    a mess’—True bill against the French Ambassador for inciting
    to murder—D’Eon’s disregard of his King’s intervention—De
    Guerchy applies for a _nolle prosequi_—Attorney-General refuses
    a certificate—Miscarriage of justice, and state of public
    feeling—Count de Broglio’s conciliatory proposals—A royal
    pension conferred on D’Eon—De Broglio’s advice—D’Eon surrenders
    his secret orders from the King                                    170

                               CHAPTER XI.

    D’Eon continues in the royal confidence—Secret correspondence
    again in peril—D’Eon’s mother persecuted—De Guerchy’s
    death—D’Eon’s last letter to him—De Vergy’s dying
    deposition—His will—D’Eon as secret correspondent—His public
    protest—The Musgrave scandal                                       189

                              CHAPTER XII.

    D’Eon and Wilkes—Fickle Louis XV.!—Literary labours—Doubts
    raised as to D’Eon’s sex—Princess Dashkoff—Heavy gambling
    transactions on D’Eon’s sex—Insult resented—Irritation at being
    thought a female—Indignant denial of being concerned in the
    bets made—State of penury—Offers of relief from Poniatovsky,
    now King of Poland—Saves England from war—Officially reported
    to be a female—Personal appearance—Death of Louis XV.—D’Eon’s
    estimate of the late King—Count de Broglio’s report on D’Eon to
    Louis XVI.—System of secret correspondence abolished—D’Eon to
    continue his reports in cypher                                     206

                              CHAPTER XIII.

    The Count de Broglio’s offers for the surrender of the King’s
    papers—D’Eon’s conditions—Failure of the transaction—Proposal
    of marriage to (Mademoiselle) D’Eon—Beaumarchais—The Madame
    Dubarry scandal—De Vergennes’ instructions to Beaumarchais—That
    Minister’s high opinion of D’Eon—Beaumarchais’ success in
    treating with D’Eon                                                227

                              CHAPTER XIV.

    D’Eon surrenders the King’s papers—Earl Ferrers’ share in their
    custody—Covenant between Beaumarchais and D’Eon, who receives
    permission to return to France—and is ordered to resume female
    attire                                                             241

                               CHAPTER XV.

    Revival of gambling policies on D’Eon’s sex—Renewed
    protests—Admits being a female to the Count de
    Broglio—Beaumarchais a hard master—He demands final
    instructions from the King—Differences of opinion, and angry
    interchange of letters                                             256

                              CHAPTER XVI.

    Beaumarchais’ reprehensible behaviour—D’Eon challenges
    Morande—Miss Wilkes’ curiosity—Feeling against D’Eon—Fresh
    difficulties with Beaumarchais—Speculators on D’Eon’s sex
    seized with panic—Lord Mansfield’s decision on the policies
    effected—D’Eon appears in public as a female—Leaves for
    France, wearing military uniform—The King’s second order to
    resume female attire—Marie Antoinette furnishes _Mademoiselle
    D’Eon’s_ trousseau—Visits her native town—Rejoicings at
    her appearance—Presented at Court as a lady—The Queen’s
    household—Deportment in society—Another trial before Lord
    Mansfield                                                          277

                              CHAPTER XVII.

    Epistle to Lord Mansfield—Voltaire on D’Eon—Anxiety to get
    quit of petticoats—Mademoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont in peaceful
    retreats—Applies for active service in the fleet—Returns to
    male attire, is arrested, and confined—Being liberated, goes
    home—Arrival in London—Fences before the Prince of Wales—Mr.
    Angelo—Mademoiselle D’Eon and Phillidor at chess—Advertised
    sale of library—Treatment by a British peer the cause
    thereof—Earl Ferrers’ bond—Sale of jewellery                       299

                             CHAPTER XVIII.

    D’Eon (_la citoyenne Geneviève_) offers her services
    to the Legislative Assembly—Is ordered to join
    General Dumouriez—Detained in England—Her English
    friends—Fences in public—Is seriously wounded—Distressing
    times—Last days—Death—Autopsy and appearance of the
    body—Administration of property—General character—Pursuits
    and habits late in life—Maxims on religion—Coldness of
    temperament—Reflections—Fugitive pieces                            322

    ARGUMENT                                                           347

    APPENDIX                                                           365

    INDEX                                                              369




_ILLUSTRATIONS._


    PORTRAIT OF LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON, 1782                    _Frontispiece_

    ARMS OF THE CHEVALIER D’EON DE BEAUMONT                      _p._ xxii

    PORTRAIT OF D’EON DE BEAUMONT, AGED 25                 _to face p._ 14

    PORTRAIT OF THE CHEVALIER D’EON, 1770                       ”      208

    FACSIMILE OF AN AUTOGRAPH TITLE-PAGE IN THE CHRISTIE
      COLLECTION OF D’EON MSS.                                  ”      258




_Erratum._


_For_ 32 Brewer Street, Golden Square, as being the residence in London
of the Chevalier D’Eon during thirty-three years, _read_ 38 Brewer
Street, Golden Square.




_WORKS REFERRED TO IN THE FOOTNOTES._


B.M. MSS., _D’Eon MSS. at the British Museum_.

Ch. MSS., _D’Eon MSS. in the possession of Mr. Christie_.

Angelo, Henry, _Reminiscences of—with Memoirs of his late Father and
Friends_. London, 1828. 2 vols.

Boutaric, M. E., Archiviste aux Archives de l’Empire. _Correspondance
secrète inédite de Louis XV. sur la politique étrangère, etc._ Paris,
1866. 2 vols.

Broglie, Le Duc de, _Le Secret du Roi, correspondance secrète de Louis
XV. avec ses agents diplomatiques, 1752-1774_. 3ᵉ édition. Paris, 1879. 2
vols.

Campan, Madame, _Mémoires sur la vie privée de Marie-Antoinette, etc._
Paris, 1822. 3 vols.

Dutens, Louis, _Mémoires d’un Voyageur qui se repose, contenant des
Anecdotes Historiques, Politiques et Littéraires, relatives à plusieurs
des principaux personnages du siècle._ Londres, 1806. 3 vols.

Flassan, Raxis de, _Histoire Générale et Raisonnée de la Diplomatie
Française, etc. etc._ Paris, 1811. 2 vols.

Fortelle, De la, _La Vie Militaire, Politique et Privée de Mademoiselle
Charles Geneviève Louis Auguste Andrée Timothée D’Eon de Beaumont, etc.
etc._ O quam te memorem Virgo! Paris, MDCCLXXIX.

Gaillardet, Fred., _Mémoires sur la Chevalière D’Eon, etc._ Paris, 1866.

Kirby, R., _Wonderful and Eccentric Museum, etc._ London, 1803.

Lacretelle, Chas., _Histoire de France pendant le dix-huitième siècle,
etc._ Paris, 1819. 6 vols.

La Messalière, _Voyage à Pétersbourg, etc._ Paris, 1803.

_Lettres, Mémoires, et Négociations Particulières du Chevalier D’Eon,
etc. etc., with MSS. Notes by D’Eon._ Londres, 1764.

Loménie, Louis de, _Beaumarchais et son Temps, etc._ 4ᵉ édition. Paris,
1879. 2 vols.

Mémoires de la Chevalière D’Eon, _MSS. work addressed to the Count de
Vergennes by the Chevalière, and preserved at the Ministère des Affaires
Étrangères._ Quoted by Gaillardet and De Broglie.

_Pièces Relatives aux Lettres, Mémoires et Négociations Particulières du
Chevalier D’Eon, etc. etc._ Londres, MDCCLXIV.

Rede, L. T., _Anecdotes and Biography, etc._ London, 1799.

Roche, James, _Critical and Miscellaneous Essays by an Octogenarian,
etc._ Cork, 1850. 2 vols.

Taylor, John, _Records of my Life, etc._ London, 1832. 2 vols.

Vandal, Albert, _Louis XV. et Elizabeth de Russie, etc._ Paris, 1882.

    24 livres tournois      = 1_l._ 1_s._
    3     ditto             = 1 écu
    1 écu                   = 2_s._ 7½_d._




[Illustration]

CHARLES-GENEVIÈVE-LOUIS-AUGUSTE-ANDRÉ-TIMOTHÉE

CHARLOTTE-GENEVIÈVE-LOUISA-AUGUSTA-ANDRÉE-TIMOTHÉE-MARIE

D’EON DE BEAUMONT.


Doctor of Civil and of Canon Law, and Advocate of the Parliament of
Paris. Censor Royal for History and Belles-Lettres. Sent to Russia,
first secretly, then officially, with the Chevalier Douglas for the
Purpose of re-establishing friendly Relations between that Country
and France. Secretary of the Embassy Extraordinary at the Court of
Her Imperial Majesty, the Empress Elizabeth. Captain of Dragoons and
Aide-de-Camp to Marshal the Duke and to the Count de Broglio. Secretary
of the Embassy Extraordinary from France to Great Britain for concluding
the Peace of 1763. Knight of the Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis.
Resident, and afterwards Minister Plenipotentiary from France to Great
Britain, and, finally, a Lady at the Court of Marie Antoinette, and an
occasional and honoured Inmate at L’Abbaye Royale des Dames de Hautes
Bruyères, La Maison des Demoiselles de St. Cyr, and at the Monastère
des Filles de Ste. Marie.




THE CHEVALIER D’EON DE BEAUMONT.




CHAPTER I.

    Birth of D’Eon de Beaumont and registry as a
    male-child—Parentage—Consecrated to the Virgin Mary and
    admitted to the Sisterhood—Pursues studies as a boy—Early
    display of abilities—As secret agent, is sent to Russia
    by Louis XV.—Reception at St. Petersburg—Enemies and
    friends—Leaves for Versailles—Invited to enter the service of
    Russia.


    ‘The deeper the search in the annals of my family,’ wrote the
    subject of this Memoir, ‘the purer, more stainless, and more
    distinguished will it prove to be. One member only, Eon de
    l’Étoile,[1] was condemned by the Council of Rheims in the year
    1148; but how many emperors, kings, and men of letters have
    been condemned and proscribed by popes and councils, legally
    or illegally. There is a vast difference between condemnation
    by the priesthood for gross errors in matters of religion,
    and condemnation by judges for the crimes of high treason,
    assassination, murder, and poisoning.

    ‘The possession of a name and noble descent, of which the
    origin is lost in obscurity, has ever been considered amongst
    civilised nations a more respectable title than one of recent
    date, owed to the favour of a king—favour accorded more
    frequently to weakness than to courage, to vice than to virtue.
    We know the secret motives by which kings are guided in their
    public acts, since the time that they have become attended
    by valets, mistresses, ministers, cabinet ministers, and
    historiographers.’[2]

On the first page of a well-thumbed devotional pamphlet in MS., given to
D’Eon de Beaumont upon his entering the Collège Mazarin, at Paris, in
1740, appears the following in that person’s own hand:—

    ‘I was born on the 5th, and baptised on October 7, 1728, at the
    parish church of Notre Dame, Tonnerre. I was confirmed in front
    of the high altar of the parish church of St. Sulpitius in
    Paris; and on Thursday, June 18, 1744, I communicated for the
    first time in the chapel of the Virgin at the parish church of
    St. Sulpitius, Paris.’[3]

The baptismal certificate is as follows:—

    ‘On October 7, 1728, was baptised
    Charles-Geneviève-Louis-Auguste-André-Thimothée, son of the
    noble Louis Déon de Beaumont, director of the King’s demesnes,
    and of dame Françoise de Charenton, his father and mother
    legitimately married, born on the 5th of the present month.
    His godfather is M. Charles Regnard, advocate of Parliament,
    bailiff of Cruzy; and godmother, dame Geneviève Déon, wife of
    M. Mouton, wine merchant at Paris, all of whom affix their
    signatures:—

                                         ‘G. DÉON.
                                         ‘C. REGNARD.
                                         ‘MOUTON.
                                         ‘BORDES, Dean of Tonnerre.’

[Sidenote: PARENTAGE AND EARLY YEARS.]

Louis Déon de Beaumont was advocate in Parliament, King’s counsellor,
sub-delegate of the Intendance of the generality of Paris, and for
some time mayor of Tonnerre. His brothers were André-Thimothée Déon de
Tissey, advocate in Parliament, censor-royal, chief secretary of police
in Paris, and principal secretary to H.R.H. the Duke d’Orleans; Jacques
Déon de Pommard, advocate in Parliament, one of the first secretaries to
the Count d’Argenson, Minister of War; Michel Déon de Germigny, knight
of the Royal and Military Order of St. Louis, one of the twenty-five
gentlemen of the King’s Scottish Guard. They were the four sons of André
Déon, advocate in Parliament, who died in 1720; whose father was Louis
Déon, lord of Ramelu, esquire, captain of infantry: all of whom lie
interred within the church of L’Hôpital Notre Dame de Fontenilles, at
Tonnerre.[4]

In the preamble to her holograph will, headed ‘Soli
Deo Honor et Gloria,’ in which she styles herself
Charlotte-Geneviève-Louise-Augusta-Andrée-Timothea-Marie D’Eon de
Beaumont, it is stated:—

    ‘Although already provided with six names, my mother having
    in her special devotion consecrated me in my infancy to the
    Virgin, the additional name of Marie was given to me at my
    confirmation by Panquet de Gersy, archbishop of Seurre. This
    name has become precious to me, because Marie has become
    my protectress in heaven, as Marie Antoinette was my queen
    protectress on earth, after my return to France.’

In another place D’Eon states that when in her fourth year she was
publicly consecrated to the Virgin Mary, in front of the high altar, at a
solemn service held for the occasion. She wore the robe of the sisterhood
of the Virgin Mary until her seventh year, when she resumed boy’s
apparel by direction of her father. To her mother’s fervent devotion and
enlightened piety in the protection of the Virgin Mary was attributed
the safety of the ‘disguised daughter’ in all the perils she encountered
in the course of her extraordinary career—by sea and by land, at foreign
courts, at sieges, in combats and in battles.[5]

From the age of seven to twelve D’Eon remained in charge of M. Marceney,
curé of the Church of St. Peter, and was then sent to the Collège
Mazarin. He completed his studies with considerable credit, obtaining
the degrees of Doctor of Civil and of Canon Law, and being subsequently
called to the bar of the Parliament of Paris. He also became royal
censor for works on history and belles-lettres. In 1749, whilst serving
as secretary to M. Bertier de Savigny, he had the misfortune to lose in
the course of five days his father, an uncle, and an income of fifteen
thousand livres. Louis Déon had rendered himself so beloved by the poor
in his district that for some time after his death they used to resort
in crowds to his grave and weep over it, and lament the loss of their
friend and benefactor. It is related of him that when on his death-bed,
and after having received the last sacrament, he sent for his daughter
(afterwards the Chevalier), and taking her by the hand, said tenderly,
‘Do not be uneasy, my daughter—it is as natural to die as it is to live.
I am quitting a bad for a better land. I have been at much pains to teach
you how to live, and I must likewise teach you how to die.’ And giving
her his blessing, he expired.[6]

Although D’Eon had lost his father, he was not left friendless; for he
remained under the protection of several persons of influence, who had
known the relatives he had lost, there being amongst them the Prince de
Conti, the Abbé de Bernis (subsequently Minister for Foreign Affairs),
the Marshal de Belle-Isle (afterwards Minister for War), also the Duchess
de Penthièvre and the Count d’Ons-en-Bray, whose funeral eulogiums,
inserted in the ‘Année Littéraire,’ were the earliest products of his
pen. These writings were succeeded by an historical essay on finance in
France, and ‘Notes on the Life and Works of the celebrated Abbé Lenglet
de Fresnoy,’ printed in the ‘Année Littéraire’ for 1755, literary labours
which served to bring him into notice at an early age as a thoughtful and
careful writer.

D’Eon was passionately fond of study, and would only quit his books for
what became his sole recreation in life—the art of fencing, in which he
proved a great expert, as shown by his election to the superintendence
of the School of Arms. D’Eon’s tastes inclined him to a military life,
rather than to what the necessities of his situation were calling him;
but his destiny summoned him to take a part in the political transactions
of his country, with what success it is the object of this work to show.

[Sidenote: FRENCH ENVOYS TO RUSSIA.]

In his desire to renew with Russia the friendly relations interrupted
since the day when the Marquis de la Chétardie was unceremoniously
escorted to the frontier (June 13, 1744), Louis XV. had dispatched to St.
Petersburg, in the year 1754, the Chevalier de Valcroissant on a secret
mission for that purpose—a mission, however, that came to an untimely
end; for the Chevalier, being unprovided with any kind of credential or
letter of recommendation, was taken up on suspicion of being a French
spy, and confined in the fortress of Schlusselburg, on the Ladoga,
whence it was not deemed prudent, for the time being at least, to seek
to liberate him.[7] The Empress Elizabeth had already made advances of a
friendly nature to the French Court, and in view of her possible treaty
of subsidies with England, the King resolved upon another effort towards
reconciliation, taking more effectual precautions to ensure success.

The person selected for this important, secret, and even hazardous
service, was a native of North Britain, named Mackenzie, but known as
the Chevalier Douglas, who represented himself as having followed the
fortunes of the Pretender and obliged to seek refuge in France, bringing
with him ‘nothing but his nobility,’ when in reality he was a Jesuit in
disguise, had lived at Liège during the late war, employed as a spy by
Holland, and had afterwards entered the service of the Prince Waldeck.[8]
When invited to proceed to Russia he was tutor in the family of the
Intendant of Paris, and passing under the name of Michel.

The importance and delicate nature of the negotiations upon which Douglas
was about to be employed—and not Douglas only, but D’Eon also, sent
with the King’s approval, at the strong recommendation of the Prince
de Conti (whose special _protégé_ he was), to accompany Douglas—will
best be estimated upon knowledge of the instructions—widely though
they differed—supplied for their respective guidance. They show that
whilst Douglas was secretly to watch and note events as an apparently
indifferent observer, it was intended that D’Eon should pass his time
in closest intimacy with such Russian ministers as might be favourably
disposed towards France, and reach, were it possible, even the Empress
herself.

[Sidenote: THE CHEVALIER DOUGLAS’ INSTRUCTIONS.]

    _Instructions to the Chevalier Douglas on proceeding to Russia._

                                                      ‘June 1, 1755.

    ‘The general situation of Europe, the troubles in Poland during
    the past year, others apprehended in the same quarter, the part
    taken in them by the Court of Petersburg, the probability that
    it is about to conclude, shortly, a treaty of subsidies with
    England through the Chevalier Williams, appointed Ambassador
    by his Britannic Majesty to the Emperor of Russia; everything
    points to the necessity for watching the proceedings and
    attitude of that Court with the closest attention.

    ‘His Majesty has not been represented there by any ambassador,
    minister, or even a consul, for a long time past, so that
    its condition is almost entirely unknown, especially as the
    character of the people, and the jealous and suspicious
    despotism of their ministers, disallows such correspondence as
    is customary in other countries.

    ‘It is considered desirable to despatch a competent person,
    with the view of obtaining reliable information on what is
    passing at the Court of Russia; he will not let it appear
    that he is in any public or private capacity, and will return
    immediately to make his report. A Frenchman would not answer
    the purpose. Notwithstanding the friendship which the Empress
    of Russia is supposed to entertain towards his Majesty, and her
    partiality towards the French nation, a subject of the King
    would be watched too closely by the ministry in Russia to be
    of any service, under whatsoever pretext he might cloak the
    object of his journey. It is on this account that —— has been
    chosen, who, being a subject of the King of Great Britain, will
    not excite suspicion. The favourable reports that have been
    received of his intelligence and zeal give reason to hope that
    he will execute this commission with success.

    ‘It is intended that he should take his departure in the
    quietest manner possible, as a gentleman travelling solely
    for his health and amusement. Such is the custom amongst many
    of his countrymen, so that he will not attract attention.
    He must not appear to have any relations with his Majesty’s
    ministers, whether in France or in the course of his travels,
    and he must not see any of them at the several places through
    which he will pass. He will be supplied with an ordinary
    passport. To avoid being interrogated at any of the great
    courts in Germany, his presence perhaps exciting curiosity,
    it is desirable that he should enter Germany through Swabia,
    whence he will pass into Bohemia under pretext of visiting for
    his own instruction the several mines in that kingdom. His
    acquaintance with mineralogy will afford a pretext for this
    journey. From Bohemia he will pass into Saxony, visiting the
    mines at Freiberg for similar reasons. Having there satisfied
    his curiosity, he will go on to Dantzig, either by way of
    Silesia, Warsaw, and Thorn, or by Brandenburghian Pomerania,
    proceeding to Frankfort-on-the-Oder, and thence to Dantzig by
    such route as may best suit him. He will make a stay of some
    days in this city for the purpose of thoroughly examining the
    causes that have led for some years past to the continued
    strife between the chief magistrate and the burgesses, and to
    discover, if possible, the cause of these dissensions, what it
    is that foments them, and if they are encouraged by any foreign
    power. Thence he will continue his journey through Prussia
    and Courland, where he will also make a stay under pretext of
    needing rest; but for the purpose of learning the state of that
    duchy, what the nobles think of the exile and deposition of the
    Prince of Courland, and the views of the Russian Ministry for
    the government of that principality. He will also make himself
    acquainted with the manner in which justice and the revenues
    are there administered, and the number of Russian troops in
    occupation. From Courland he will pass into Livonia, and follow
    the high road to St. Petersburg. His first care on arrival
    will be to make known, without any affectation, the reasons
    for undertaking his journey, which is one of pure curiosity.
    He will endeavour to make the acquaintance of those able to
    supply him with the information of which he is in search. He
    cannot observe too great caution in his mode of procedure to
    obtain information; he must not evince partiality for any one
    nation more than for another. Although the causes that have
    necessitated his departure from England would appear to prevent
    him from making the acquaintance of the Chevalier Williams;
    still, if as he asserts, he is quite unknown, he might make it
    a point to see him as every Englishman would his minister. He
    will make himself acquainted as secretly as possible with the
    success of that minister’s negotiations for the troops with
    which England is to be supplied, and with the number of troops
    that Russia has actually at command; with the condition of her
    fleets, her ships and galleys; with the state of her finance,
    commerce, and the disposition of the nation towards the present
    ministry; the degree of Count Bestoujeff’s influence; that
    of Count Woronzoff; of the Empress’ favourites, whether in
    affairs of State or in the pursuit of pleasure; their probable
    influence on ministers; the concord or jealousy that exists
    amongst ministers, and their bearing towards the favourites;
    with the fate of Prince Ivan, the late Tzar, and of the Duke
    of Brunswick, his father; the affection of the nation towards
    the Grand Duke of Russia, and especially since the birth of
    his son; whether Prince Ivan has secret partisans, and if they
    are supported by England; the desire of the Russians to live
    in peace, and of their disinclination for war, more especially
    in Germany; the views of Russia in regard to Poland, for the
    present, and in whatsoever eventuality in the future; with her
    projects on Sweden; with the impression produced by the death
    of the Sultan Mahmoud, and Osman’s accession to the throne;
    with her conduct in regard to the Porte; with the causes that
    have led to the recall from the Ukraine of Count Razoumoffsky,
    hetman of Cossacks; with what is thought of the loyalty of
    those people, and the manner in which they are treated by the
    Court of Petersburg; with the Empress’ sentiments towards
    France, and those with which she is in all probability inspired
    by her ministry, to prevent her from renewing correspondence
    with his Majesty; with the factions by which the Court may be
    divided; with those of her subjects, male or female, in whom
    the Empress is able to confide; with her sentiments and those
    of her ministers towards the Courts of Vienna and London;
    with all, in short, that can be of interest to his Majesty’s
    service, and satisfy his curiosity. He will obtain all this
    information so far as such an uncommunicative country will
    allow him to. He will take notes on all these subjects to
    serve for a memoir which he will draw up, and send to France
    only after he will have quitted Russia, unless the Swedish
    minister at Petersburg, who will receive instructions to
    forward despatches to Stockholm by courier, should send any to
    Sweden. He must never risk anything through the ordinary post
    except notice of his arrival, and a report of the progress he
    is making in obtaining information as required above; and to
    do this he must employ, in a few words, figurative language,
    agreed upon beforehand, and send his letters to addresses with
    which he will be furnished.

    ‘So soon as he feels that he has fairly well obtained all the
    required information, he will make a report to that effect, and
    will then receive orders to return to France, either by the
    same route or through Sweden, again under pretext of visiting
    mines, that he may continue to conceal the real object of his
    journey. On the manner in which he will execute so important
    and delicate a commission, will depend the prospect of his
    Majesty again making use of his talents and zeal, as also the
    favours with which his Majesty will mark his appreciation of
    his services.’

[Sidenote: SECRET AGENT TO LOUIS XV.]

    _Figurative language to be employed by the Chevalier Douglas in
    his correspondence committed to the ordinary post._

    ‘The basis of the figurative language will be the purchase of
    furs. The “black fox” will signify the Chevalier Williams; if
    he succeeds, the “black fox” will be dear, because orders to
    purchase have been received from England.

    ‘The words “ermine is in demand,” will signify that the Russian
    party dominates, and that consequently no foreigners are in
    favour. If, on the contrary, the Austrian party, at the head
    of which is M. de Bestucheff, preponderates, word must be sent
    that the “lynx” is also in demand.

    ‘To designate the waning influence of M. de Bestucheff, this
    phrase is to be employed: “the price of _sobols_ or sables
    is falling;” or “they stand at the same price,” to indicate
    that his influence continues the same. “Squirrel skins”
    are to signify troops in the pay of England. To understand
    this clearly, the number of skins to be sent will always be
    augmented by two-thirds to signify the number of troops, so
    that ten skins will signify thirty thousand men, and twenty,
    sixty or seventy.

    ‘—— will not write to say that he will send the furs, but he
    will simply advise that he will bring them with him upon his
    return.

    ‘In passing through Dantzig —— will send one of his servants
    to Graudenz, a small town in Polish Prussia, there to post a
    letter, in which he will advise as to what he may have learnt
    at Dantzig on the subject of the existing dissensions between
    the chief magistrate and the burgesses. This letter to be
    addressed to ——.

    ‘These letters will be in the form of bills of exchange, and
    according to the greater or less success in the inquiries made,
    upon which will depend the length of stay; notice should be
    given whether or no remittances are needed. If nothing can
    be done, —— will report that the climate is injurious to his
    health, and that he is in want of a remittance to enable him to
    go elsewhere.

    ‘If —— is not to go to Sweden, he will receive for answer that
    since his health suffers, it is considered to his advantage
    that he should return directly. If, on the contrary, it is
    deemed expedient that he should proceed, the same will be
    intimated to him in the form of advice. If it is considered
    necessary that he should return, the remark will be made to him
    that a muff has been obtained here, and that consequently he is
    requested not to purchase one.

    ‘The whole of this, written in small characters and epitomised,
    will be placed by —— in the false bottom of a tortoise-shell
    snuff-box, which will not induce any suspicion.’[9]

The duties confided to D’Eon were entirely distinct and of a more
intimate nature. He was supplied by M. Tercier, chief clerk at the
Foreign Office and in charge of the King’s secret correspondence, with a
quarto copy of Montesquieu’s ‘Esprit des Lois,’ the binding, in double
boards, being cunningly devised to hold papers. The documents thus
concealed and entrusted to D’Eon included private letters from the King
to the Empress Elizabeth; a cypher for the intelligence of her Imperial
Majesty and Count Woronzoff, the Vice-Chancellor, in their correspondence
with Louis XV.;[10] a cypher for D’Eon’s own correspondence with the King
and Tercier, and another cypher for D’Eon’s use in communicating with the
Prince de Conti, Tercier, and M. Monin. He received strict injunctions
that none of the King’s ministers, not even any ambassador his Majesty
might have at St. Petersburg, should be allowed to entertain the
slightest suspicion of this secret intercourse; he was ordered to furnish
the King with copies of all letters received from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, together with the Ambassador’s replies, noting thereon
his own observations, and he was further required to thwart clandestinely
any transactions on the part of the King’s ministers, so long as they
were in opposition to the secretly known royal will and pleasure.[11]

Douglas then left Paris in the summer of 1755 as a British tourist, an
amateur geologist travelling in search of health and amusement, and
having got to Anhalt, he there waited until D’Eon joined him. Proceeding
on his journey, Douglas strictly followed the route traced out in his
instructions, and when at Dantzig, where as at Amsterdam and Leipzig
he had large credits, he announced his intention to visit the mines in
Sweden; but suddenly changing his mind, he started for St. Petersburg,
where he arrived in the earliest days of October. He lost no time in
making his appearance at the British embassy, and introducing himself as
a subject of the King and a relative of the Earl of Morton, requested Sir
Hanbury Williams to present him at Court. This the British Ambassador
refused to do unless he was properly assured of his identity. Scarcely
was Douglas gone, than the Swedish minister called to ask Sir Hanbury
whether he objected to his presenting the Chevalier Douglas at Court. Sir
Hanbury promptly replied that he did not see what business the Swedish
minister had to present the King’s subjects, and if he ever attempted
such a thing, he would take it very ill; upon which the Swedish minister
said that he should no longer meddle in the affair. Douglas then went
to see Count Esterhazy, the Ambassador from Vienna, whose suspicions he
immediately awakened by explaining his presence at St. Petersburg as due
to the advice of his physicians that he should seek a cold climate for
the benefit of his health. Finding all access to the Russian Court thus
closed against him, Douglas precipitately left the capital and returned
to France, bitterly complaining of Sir Hanbury’s treatment in every town
through which he passed.[12]

[Sidenote: AT THE COURT OF RUSSIA.]

We are left quite in the dark as to the means by which D’Eon succeeded in
obtaining admission at Court, but the matter was doubtless arranged by
the Vice-Chancellor Woronzoff, friendly to France, through the Swedish
minister, to whom Douglas had brought letters of introduction from the
Swedish minister at Paris, or possibly through Michel, a French banker,
as stated by La Messalière. There is good evidence in support of the
tradition that D’Eon was received by the Empress in female habiliments,
that in this disguise she ingratiated herself with her Majesty, gained
her confidence, and interesting her in the object of his mission, had
succeeded in reviving her old feelings of attachment towards France and
towards Louis XV., her suitor of days gone by.[13] It is certain that
the ill-humour and coldness of the Russian Court towards England in the
course of the year 1756, was of much earlier date than the Neutrality
Convention between Prussia and England (January 16, 1756), and this was
attributed by Sir Hanbury, together with the Empress’s delay in signing
the ratifications to her Treaty of Subsidies with Great Britain, entirely
to the success of French influence after Douglas had first made his
appearance;[14] but Douglas not being at all in Russia between the end
of October 1755, and the end of April 1756, such exercise of French
influence could only have been due to elaborate intrigues on the part of
D’Eon during the several months he spent at Court as reader (_lecteur_)
to the Empress,[15] an appointment conferred upon him, perhaps, with the
design of cloaking his real profession.

In early life D’Eon was of peculiarly prepossessing appearance; his
manners were gentle and engaging, his disposition soft and amiable, all
of which, with his general physique, eminently adapted him to personify a
female; and if there is no direct proof in substantiation of the oft-told
tale that D’Eon appeared at the Court of Elizabeth in female attire,
there is at least valuable evidence in support of it.

It may be mentioned in regard to D’Eon’s looks, that during his second
stay at St. Petersburg, when secretary of Embassy, a Russian officer one
day observed to him that with his hair so neatly powdered he greatly
resembled the infant Jesus. D’Eon, who throughout his career showed the
greatest aversion to any kind of remark on his feminine appearance, and
disliked, besides, all that was Russian, very pertly replied: ‘Yes, you
are right, for I happen to be in a very dirty manger.’[16]

[Illustration: _To face page 14._

D’EON DE BEAUMONT.

AGED 25.

_See Appendix._]

During Douglas’ absence D’Eon was putting his intelligence and tact
to the best use in the service of his master, his task being rendered
somewhat easier by Elizabeth’s kindly feelings towards France and the
French, which had never entirely changed,[17] even though her two
favourites, the Marquis de la Chétardie and the Count Lestocq, had long
since been disposed of; the first, as already stated, by being thrust
out of the empire, the latter—of whom in allusion to his treachery her
Majesty said: ‘If Lestocq could have poisoned all Russia with one dose,
he would assuredly have done so’—by being tortured and exiled to Oustouk.
D’Eon had wisely commenced by insinuating himself in the good graces of
the Vice-Chancellor, whose predilections were completely French, and who
being married to the Countess Skavronsky, a cousin of the Empress, proved
his powerful support and shield against the Grand Chancellor Bestoujeff
Riumin, the known leader of the Prussian party hostile to France.

But five years before this Bestoujeff had so effectually prejudiced the
mind of Elizabeth against Prussia, that her ambassador, Gross, very
hastily and unceremoniously took his departure one morning from Berlin,
without in the least troubling himself to announce his intentions to
anybody. Since that time, Bestoujeff fancied he saw good cause for
changing his views.

[Sidenote: THE GRAND-DUCHESS CATHERINE.]

Peter, the son of Anna Petrovna, by her marriage with Charles
Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, could never forget his German
birth and parentage, and even after being created a Grand Duke of
Russia, he continued to attach far greater importance to his title of
Holstein-Gottorp, remaining perfectly indifferent to the interests
of the Russian people, and maintaining about him a suite and retinue
consisting entirely of Germans. His consort, Catherine of Anhalt-Zerbst
(afterwards Catherine II.), sought, on the contrary, to identify herself
with the country of her adoption, embracing the religion, and following
the manners and customs of the people. Politically, she desired a good
understanding with England, entirely deprecating alliance with France
and Austria; and when the report of the probable arrival of a French
ambassador was gaining ground, she expressed her uneasiness to Sir
Hanbury, saying she should act up to anything he might suggest to prevent
such a thing. Sir Hanbury reminded Catherine that her known confidence
in Bestoujeff had made the Schouvaloffs her secret enemies; but that the
latter, in themselves, had neither sense, courage, nor money enough to do
any harm to her succession, although the arrival of a French ambassador
might change the scene, for he would do all in his power, sparing neither
pains nor money, to injure her. Catherine’s feelings were perfectly
well known to Elizabeth, who used to say of her that ‘she was a clever
woman, only she prided herself on being more clever than anybody else.’
The most powerful man at Court because the greatest favourite was Ivan
Schouvaloff. He was fond of everything that was French, understood their
language, followed all their fashions, and was known to have always
wished that a French ambassador might arrive at St. Petersburg. Small
causes produce great effects, and the reconciliation proceeding between
Russia and France was partly owing to the caprice of that young man.[18]

[Sidenote: RETURN TO VERSAILLES.]

Bestoujeff, foreseeing the more probable course of events, seized the
opportunity for turning his coat, and assuring the grand-duchess of
his devotion to her person and to her views, and for expressing to the
grand-duke, her husband, his own desire for the maintenance of good
relations with Prussia. English, French, Austrian, and even Prussian
gold was being freely scattered at St. Petersburg,[19] but in the end
D’Eon, Schouvaloff, and Woronzoff obtained every advantage over the
grand-ducal party. Consenting to receive a French representative at
her Court, Elizabeth wrote privately to Louis XV. to that effect, the
letter being carried to its destination by D’Eon, in his volume ‘Esprit
des Lois,’ after Douglas’ return from Versailles. We cannot undertake
to fix the date of D’Eon’s departure from St. Petersburg nearer than
that a letter of June 12, 1756, from Sir Hanbury Williams to the Earl
of Holdernesse, announces ‘a creature of the Vice-Chancellor is soon to
set out from hence to Paris to negotiate this affair.’ In parting with
D’Eon, the Empress invited him to enter her service, promising honourable
and lucrative employment; but D’Eon was too deeply attached to his own
country to entertain such a proposal; and resisting the offer, said
that the renewal of friendly relations between the two countries, the
advantages of which he had already pointed out, would afford him the
opportunity for serving the interests of Russia without neglecting those
of the Court of France; a reply which served to increase the esteem
already entertained for him by Elizabeth.




CHAPTER II.

    Sir Hanbury Williams and Count Woronzoff—The Empress
    Elizabeth’s message to France—Chevalier Douglas, French Chargé
    d’Affaires in Russia with D’Eon as secretary—Commencement of
    the Seven Years’ War—Count Apraxin’s defection—D’Eon leaves
    for Versailles—Trait of character—Reception by Louis XV. and
    ministers—Proceeds to Russia—The will of Peter the Great—Count
    Bestoujeff’s opinion of D’Eon—Prince Poniatovsky and his
    diamond—D’Eon as a fencer—Bestoujeff’s arrest—D’Eon again
    invited to take service in Russia.


Leaving Paris under the name of Léonard, for the second time as the
King’s secret envoy to Russia, but armed upon this occasion with private
credentials from M. Rouillé, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and ‘a great
deal of money to dispose of,’ Douglas passed through Dantzig, and Riga
where he falsely represented himself as envoy extraordinary from France
to Russia, and was accordingly received as such by the governor of that
town. With equal disregard to the truth, he made it his business upon
this journey to spread the report that in the treaty concluded between
England and Prussia there was a secret article whereby the former Power
was to pay to the latter an annual subsidy of 200,000_l._! He arrived
at St. Petersburg on April 22 (N.S.), requested an interview of the
Vice-Chancellor at 9 P.M. for the same evening—obtained it—and forthwith
delivered a letter from M. Rouillé, with friendly messages on the part
of the King. Shortly afterwards he was presented at Court as a Scottish
gentleman in the service of France, to the delight of Louis XV. and his
ministers.[20]

When questioned by Sir Hanbury Williams, the Vice-Chancellor admitted
that Douglas was entrusted with a commission from the King of France,
although not in an official capacity. He could give no information on
the nature of that commission, but Sir Hanbury might rest assured that
the Court of Russia would not enter into anything with France that
could be prejudicial to the interests of England. It was not the first
time, he said, that France had made overtures to Russia, but he was too
well acquainted with the French nation ever to be their dupe, and he
should not fail to give further information when in a position to do so.
Within twenty-four hours of this conversation, the Chancellor Bestoujeff
declared to Sir Hanbury that he was kept quite out of the secret, and
knew nothing of Douglas’ return until his arrival at Riga.[21]

[Sidenote: SECOND JOURNEY TO RUSSIA.]

When D’Eon again made his appearance at St. Petersburg, Douglas was
simply delighted. ‘I am very greatly pleased at the arrival of M.
D’Eon,’ he wrote to M. Rouillé; ‘I have been long acquainted with his
intelligence, his zeal, and attachment to his work. He will be very
useful to me, and also of good service to the King. He is steady and
prudent....’[22]

Chancing to call one morning on Count Woronzoff, the British ambassador
was not admitted. In the court-yard was Douglas’ coach. The next day
Woronzoff sent for Baron Wolff, to tell him the reason he had not
received Sir Hanbury was because Douglas being with him, he did not
know whether the English ambassador would have liked to meet him. Sir
Hanbury, who naturally looked upon Douglas as a rebel of the first water,
since he was actually in the service of England’s enemies, replied that
if such was the message, the excuse was worse than the fault, for he
refused to be put upon a level with such a fellow as Douglas.

The Treaty of Versailles (May 1, 1756) had placed Douglas and Count
Esterhazy upon an entirely new footing. Their lengthened conferences,
at first held secretly in a third place, and their growing intimacy,
prevented Sir Hanbury from conversing any longer with the Austrian
minister on matters of business. French subjects were invited to consider
themselves under the protection of the Empress-Queen’s ambassador, and
Russia’s ministers at foreign courts were instructed to live on good
terms with those of France. Such were the political changes in progress,
when Elizabeth openly professed her desire to renew diplomatic relations
with the King of France.

M. Rouillé’s courteous letter of February 9, presented to the
Vice-Chancellor by Douglas upon the same evening of his arrival at St.
Petersburg, and in which, by way of precaution, should the letter have
miscarried, the secret envoy was spoken of as being a librarian, was as
courteously answered under date of April 20 (O.S.). A long ‘Mémoire,’
also handed to Douglas for transmission to the French minister, in reply
to the friendly advances made by Louis XV., and in which are expressed
her Imperial Majesty’s views on drawing closer together the improving
relations between Russia and France, contains this passage:—

    ‘It would be very agreeable to her Imperial Majesty if the
    Chevalier Douglas was more fully authorised or accredited as
    Chargé d’Affaires, so as to render it possible for both sides
    to treat with greater authority on the other matters included
    in his instructions, and serve not only to the glory and to
    the mutual advantage of the two Courts, but also to their
    prompt reunion. Yet, notwithstanding the insufficiency of the
    Chevalier’s authorisation, he will continue to be treated with
    distinction, and listened to with consideration, as being a
    person sent to this country on the part of his Most Christian
    Majesty.’[23]

[Sidenote: APPOINTED SECRETARY OF LEGATION.]

In July, Douglas was accredited Chargé d’Affaires to the Court of Russia,
taking up his residence at the Apraxin Palace, near the Summer Palace,
D’Eon being appointed Secretary of Legation, and entrusted with the
secret correspondence; communicating with the Prince de Conti, and with
the King through Tercier, and still the medium of intercourse between
the Empress and Woronzoff on the one hand, and Louis XV. on the other;
by which arrangement Douglas was enabled to entertain uninterrupted
relations with Elizabeth and Woronzoff on subjects of a nature to be kept
concealed from Bestoujeff Riumin.

As the Treaty of Subsidies, an acknowledged fact between England and
Russia, was set at naught by England’s Neutrality Treaty with Prussia,
so did Elizabeth cast the former to the winds, and in due course unite
herself to the French-Austrian alliance, in spite of all that Catherine
and Bestoujeff could do to prevent such a thing. Frederick’s sarcasms had
no more spared the Empress of Russia and the Empress-Queen than Madame
de Pompadour, and the licentious Elizabeth thought it worth her while to
retaliate by expressing her indignation at the King of Prussia’s little
concern in matters of religion. ‘He does not believe in God! He never
goes to Church! There is nothing that is sacred in his eyes!’ Some years
had passed since she uttered those words; she had not forgiven him, now
she was joining the coalition against that monarch, and so was about to
begin what is known as the Seven Years’ War.

The eighty thousand men for whom Sir Hanbury had bargained were assembled
in Livonia under Count Apraxin,[24] the firm friend of Bestoujeff, when
they shortly entered Poland. The war was commenced by the Austrians, the
first to receive Frederick’s fire and under Marshal Daun to defeat him
at Kolin (June 18), afterwards marching upon Berlin and bearing away all
the tribute money they could collect. Their German allies invaded Prussia
from Saxony, the Swedes not long delaying in entering Pomerania, and
the French attacking out of Hanover after having occupied Embden (July
3). Hearing that Apraxin had taken Memel, Frederick sent Field-Marshal
Lewald with twenty-five thousand men to keep him in check, and a battle
was fought at Gross-Jägersdorff near Königsberg (August 30), in which the
Russians overpowered the enemy simply through force of numbers. Frederick
being left with about twenty thousand men only, began to fear that all
was lost, when the astounding intelligence reached him that the Russians,
‘who were more easily killed than beaten,’ were withdrawing towards their
own frontier—a movement executed during the illness, believed to be
serious, of Elizabeth, who no sooner heard of Apraxin’s strange doings,
than she ordered him to be recalled and his conduct investigated. But
the field-marshal did not long survive his return, and why he failed to
follow up the advantages he had gained by the most complete of victories,
was never explained by himself. Later, his reasons were guessed!

[Sidenote: SECOND RETURN TO VERSAILLES.]

D’Eon had quitted St. Petersburg in April, entrusted by the Empress with
private letters to Maria Theresa and Louis XV.; he was the bearer to the
Courts of Vienna and Versailles of Elizabeth’s friendly assurances that
the Treaty of Subsidies with England was no longer of effect, and that
the eighty thousand men she had assembled in Livonia and Courland should
henceforth act in concert with the forces of Austria and France. He was
also charged to deliver the ratification to the Treaty of Versailles,
the plan to be pursued by the Russian army in its operations with the
Austrian and French troops, and other papers of considerable importance
relating to secret transactions in which he had borne a part; and,
further, he was commissioned by Count Schouvaloff to take with him fifty
thousand livres in gold, being a gift from the Empress to Voltaire, who
had received her Majesty’s commands to write the life of Peter—specie
D’Eon lodged with the bankers Hermani and Dietrich, at Strasburg, on his
way through that town.

In her letter to the King, Elizabeth referred to D’Eon in flattering
terms as having been instrumental in conducing to the happy results which
necessitated the journey he was about to take, and ‘as a mark of her
favour’ she presented him with a gratuity of three hundred ducats.[25]

When D’Eon first went to Russia, one commission entrusted to him was to
obtain for the Prince de Conti, from the Empress, the command-in-chief of
the Russian army and the principality of Courland; the secret aim of the
prince being, through such means, to work his way gradually to the throne
of Poland, and to that of Russia by marrying Elizabeth. Douglas and D’Eon
had met with success on the two first points, which alone had been mooted
to the Empress, and D’Eon’s errand to Versailles included the Empress’
and Woronzoff’s assurances to the prince that he should have the command
of the army and the principality of Courland, if the King would....[26]
The rest is obliterated by D’Eon in his letter.

One result of Douglas’ and D’Eon’s labours was the appointment of an
ambassador to the Court of Russia in the person of the Marquis de
l’Hôpital; but a whole year having elapsed between that minister’s
nomination and departure for his post, it so happened that when D’Eon got
to Bieloyēstok on his way to Vienna, the two met, to the great advantage
of the marquis, as he himself subsequently avowed; for he was supplied
with so much useful practical information, upon a country of which he
knew literally nothing, as a somewhat hurried interview would allow.

It was nightfall on the day that D’Eon got to the gates of Vienna, where
a little incident occurred which serves to illustrate at least one trait
in his character.

Although provided with passports that should have assured freedom from
all kind of molestation or delay, the Customs’ officers refused to allow
him to enter the city without first searching his effects. Obstinately
objecting to submit to what he considered a gross indignity, but feeling
himself under the circumstances to be the weakest, he made up his mind to
pass the night outside the walls. A sergeant of hussars going his rounds
offered the stranger a shelter in the guard-room. There being no French
ambassador at Vienna, D’Eon sent, in the early morning, an account of
his night’s adventure to Baron de Toussaint, a favourite of the Emperor,
which resulted in the dismissal of the two Customs’ officers and the
promotion of the sergeant to the rank of lieutenant.[27]

[Sidenote: TIMELY ARRIVAL AT VIENNA.]

At Vienna D’Eon found the Count de Broglio, French minister to Poland,
who had received orders to pass through that capital, and there concert
such alterations as might be considered advisable in the plan prepared
by Marshal D’Estrées for the ensuing campaign; a measure facilitated by
D’Eon’s timely appearance with the Russian plan of operations and his
intimate knowledge of Russian affairs, which proved of invaluable service
to the count. During his hurried stay at Vienna, news were received of
the battle of Prague (May 6), ‘the bloodiest battle of the age,’ as
Frederick called it, and de Broglio at once despatched him to carry the
gratifying intelligence to Versailles. The hot haste in which he had
travelled from St. Petersburg was not to be compared to the diligence
he employed in bearing such additional good tidings; he managed to
outstrip by thirty-six hours the special courier sent by Prince Kaunitz
to Count Staremberg, Austrian ambassador at Paris, although he reached
his destination with a broken leg, caused by the overturning of the
coach in his headlong journey; the accident and its cause only serving
to intensify the interest already felt in the young secretary, who was
attended by the King’s own surgeon immediately upon arrival.

D’Eon met with a most flattering reception by the Cardinal de Bernis,
Foreign Minister, and Marshal de Belle-Isle, Minister of War, and a month
or two later he received a handsome gold snuff-box, with portrait, from
the King, inside which he found a gratuity from the privy purse, and,
what he prized most, a commission as lieutenant of dragoons.

D’Eon’s employment being still secret, and chiefly so in the King’s
service, as well as public in the quality of Secretary of Legation, he
was bound to apply for permission to convey to the Prince de Conti the
message entrusted to him at St. Petersburg. It was granted by the King.

    _Louis XV. to Tercier._

                                                     ‘July 20, 1757.

    ‘Since M. D’Eon is commissioned by M. Woronzoff to see Prince
    de Conty, he must see him, but he is to give you an exact
    account of the Prince de Conty’s reply. As this will some day
    become publicly known, I must be informed of it by other means
    than these....’

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                    ‘August 7, 1757.

    ‘... The Sieur D’Eon must not communicate to anybody what he
    knows of the secret....’[28]

D’Eon had several interviews and some secret correspondence with the
Prince de Conti upon the success of his mission to St. Petersburg; but
the Prince and Madame de Pompadour were no longer on good terms, she
being too exacting to suit his pride, and the King would or could not
make up his mind in favour of his kinsman.

    _Louis XV. to Tercier._

                                 ‘Fontainebleau, September 15, 1757.

    ‘... If the Empress of Russia really summons the Prince de
    Conty to the command of her armies, and desires to give him
    Courland, until something better turns up, I shall be very
    glad; but for the present I can no longer take a direct part
    other than that of not offering any opposition, and give my
    consent when nothing else will be wanted.... I approve of your
    giving a cypher to the Sieur D’Eon, if he has not yet left....’

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                ‘September 21, 1757.

    ‘... When I am morally satisfied that the Empress of Russia
    destines him (the Prince de Conti) for the command of her army
    and for Courland, I will give all authority and permission
    required of me. Until then I am quite averse to it, for fear
    of taking a false step, which might do us more harm than
    good....’[29]

D’Eon was anxious to take to Russia a decided answer of some sort, and
when on his next journey he halted five days at Strasburg by desire
of the Prince, who hoped to overtake him there with some favourable
settlement of his case. But nothing came.

[Sidenote: THE WILL OF PETER THE GREAT.]

D’Eon never wasted his time. Whilst laid up under surgical treatment,
enduring no little suffering from the resetting of a broken limb, he
worked at collating a mass of useful information he had obtained in
Russia from various sources, producing a valuable ‘Mémoire,’ upon which
he was complimented by King and ministers. In this ‘Mémoire,’ Gaillardet
includes a document which has been the subject-matter of frequent
controversy, its authenticity being discredited and derided—the will of
Peter the Great; but he negligently omits to state where he consulted
the copy of the will in D’Eon’s own hand, and as we have been unable to
verify the existence of such a copy we forbear reproducing it, because
otherwise it has no place here, and leave the task to some one more
favoured than we could expect to be, in searching amongst the French
archives.

In a monograph which appeared at Brussels in 1863,[30] the author fathers
the will of Peter the Great on Napoleon I., and ascribes the earliest
publication of it to Lesur in his ‘Des Progrès de la puissance Russe,
depuis son origine jusqu’au commencement du XIXᵐᵉ siècle,’ printed in
1812 under the immediate superintendence of the French Government, at
the time that the Emperor was preparing for the invasion of Russia.
In this pamphlet Gaillardet (in whose fanciful story of the Chevalier
D’Eon, edition of 1836, the author read the will) is charged with having
reproduced the will from the pages of Lesur.

On receiving his commission in the army D’Eon applied for active service,
having grown tired and become disgusted with the intrigues of a life
at Court, and the sight of troops in Courland, Prussia, Silesia, and
Moravia, when upon his journey from Russia, having ‘only served to
inspire him with martial ardour.’ But he was too precious and too useful
in Russia to be allowed to have his own way. The Marquis de l’Hôpital
was pressing him to return to St. Petersburg. ‘My dear little fellow, I
have learnt with pain of your accident, and with great pleasure of your
interviews with the Old and New Testaments.[31] Come, live out the Gospel
with us, and rely upon my friendship and esteem.’ To which Douglas added:
‘I also embrace you, my dear cripple, and hope you will have left before
the arrival of this letter to join your worthy protector, who will be a
father to you.’ Over and above all, the King’s ministers expressed the
wish that D’Eon should return to Russia with the least possible delay
to perform a particular piece of service, for which he was specially
qualified.

[Sidenote: THIRD JOURNEY TO RUSSIA.]

It so happened that D’Eon had discovered the existence of a secret
correspondence between the grand-duke, assisted by Bestoujeff, and the
King of Prussia, whose interests they preferred to serve, Apraxin and
Todleben, the Empress’s two generals in command of her army on the field;
the design being to keep the Russian troops in a state of inaction, and
thus deprive the newly-allied Courts of the advantages to be derived from
the treaties so happily brought about by Douglas and himself. D’Eon alone
seemed to have knowledge of this surreptitious intercourse, and being
required to bring it to light it was manifest that he should return to
Russia.

    _Cardinal de Bernis to the Marquis de l’Hôpital._

                                          ‘Compiègne, July 24, 1757.

    ‘Sir,—The King has been pleased to take into favourable
    consideration your request that M. D’Eon de Beaumont should
    serve under your orders as First Secretary to your Embassy,
    and his Majesty has the more willingly resolved upon so doing,
    as the knowledge acquired by M. D’Eon on the government and
    administration of Russia, gives just grounds for assuming
    that he will be of great use to you and to the King’s
    service....’[32]

In September D’Eon left Paris, again as the sole confidential
correspondent of Louis XV. He was supplied with copies of the
instructions sent to the French ambassador at St. Petersburg and of those
from Prince Kaunitz to Count Esterhazy, and he was ordered to concert
measures with Count Woronzoff for disclosing to the Empress the Grand
Chancellor’s treachery. He also took with him a letter to Woronzoff,
in which Tercier repeated the King’s desire to entertain a secret
correspondence with the Empress.[33] Douglas was at the same time on his
way to Versailles, having been recalled at the request of Bestoujeff, who
was informed by the French ambassador that the recall was an accomplished
fact, done as a favour to him.[34]

    _Cardinal de Bernis to the Marquis de l’Hôpital._

                                 ‘Fontainebleau, September 13, 1757.

    ‘I send to you, my dear ambassador, our dear little D’Eon,
    with whom I hope you will be pleased. He is most intelligent,
    zealous, and of a highly amiable disposition. His fortune[35]
    lies in his hands as it does in yours. If you are as satisfied
    with his conduct and diligence as I hope and wish you may be,
    he may depend upon my being careful to, &c....’[36]

The announcement of D’Eon’s approaching arrival was received with
ill-concealed concern by the Grand Chancellor, who suggested to the
Marquis de l’Hôpital the desirability of this appointment being
cancelled. He represented D’Eon to be a dangerous person whom they would
not cease to mistrust, for they believed him capable of overturning the
empire; an unguarded speech, producing a result contrary to what was
desired by Bestoujeff, for de l’Hôpital only called the more loudly for
his new secretary, whose presence was feared by the Prussian party.[37]

D’Eon was now in Russia for the third time.

Meeting the English ambassador at dinner one evening, the conversation
turned upon the trial and execution of Admiral Byng. D’Eon observed that
for his part he was very sorry for the admiral. ‘Why?’ inquired the
ambassador. ‘Because,’ replied D’Eon, ‘he was a great friend to France:
he never did her any harm!’

Invited upon another occasion to join in an English dance, D’Eon said
that his business at St Petersburg was not to dance English dances, but
to make the English jump!’[38]

[Sidenote: PRINCE PONIATOVSKY’S DIAMOND.]

D’Eon relates an incident that occurred in November, shortly after his
arrival at St. Petersburg. Prince Poniatovsky, envoy extraordinary from
Poland, wrote to ask him for certain information on events then passing,
his letter being accompanied by a diamond of the value of eight thousand
livres. As a matter of course D’Eon handed over the letter and the bribe
to the ambassador, by whom the gem was immediately returned to the
Polish minister, who got into such a passion that he threw it into the
fire. De l’Hôpital reported the circumstance to the Cardinal de Bernis,
and the King’s promise was made that such an act of fidelity should be
rewarded by the presentation to the secretary of a sum of equal value
to the diamond; but Bernis’ disgrace and exile caused the matter to be
forgotten.[39]

D’Eon was well known to Poniatovsky, who did not forget him in
after years, his proficiency in the art of fencing being one of the
accomplishments that rendered him a favourite with those at Court, and
he frequently dined with the grand-duke, with Prince Charles (for a
time Duke of Courland), or with Poniatovsky, the evenings being spent
in fencing. If pressure of work prevented him from accepting the
invitations he received, the French ambassador was scolded by those
personages for having detained him at the Embassy.[40]

On February 24, 1758, the Grand Chancellor, Bestoujeff Riumin, was
arrested by order of Elizabeth, whilst presiding at a council of
ministers. Amidst his papers, which were all seized, was found a scheme
for disposing of certain persons obnoxious to him, amongst whom were
included Douglas and D’Eon.[41] He was charged with high treason, the
French and Austrian ambassadors being loud in their condemnation of
his criminal purposes. At the same time were arrested several other
persons having constant access to the Grand-Duchess Catherine, such, for
instance, as her secretary, her tutor in the Russian language, jeweller,
&c., and she herself became the object of so great obloquy that she
demanded permission to withdraw to Germany, a step the Empress refused to
sanction.

The conjectures formed to account for Bestoujeff’s perfidy were various,
but it was generally accepted that Elizabeth, having been seriously
indisposed and her death apprehended, the Grand Chancellor was anxious
to secure Catherine’s favour by withholding the Russian forces from
taking part in further hostilities against Frederick. He also aimed at
securing the succession of her child to the exclusion of the grand-duke,
his father, with the nomination of herself to the regency, or even her
own elevation to the throne. This view of the case received confirmation
in after years, for Bestoujeff was never permitted to return from exile
until the accession of Catherine.

[Sidenote: THE ARREST OF COUNT BESTOUJEFF.]

When under arrest, Bestoujeff was treated with unusual consideration,
notwithstanding the general feeling against him from his known intimacy
with Apraxin, the cause of so much national disgrace. He was detained
for a time a prisoner in his own house, escaping the tortures to which
others, equally compromised with himself, had been subjected; and,
although designated ‘a traitor grown old in iniquity,’ it was decreed
in the imperial manifesto ordering his trial, that ‘no severity was to
be employed for the purpose of exacting his evidence or confession; but
whatever he chose to say was to be noted.’

Bestoujeff was exiled to one of his estates, and Woronzoff succeeded him
as Grand Chancellor.

After the Bestoujeff affair, the Empress renewed her efforts—this time
through his superiors—to induce D’Eon to enter her service.

    _The Marquis de l’Hôpital to the Cardinal de Bernis._

                                     ‘St. Petersburg, June 29, 1758.

    ‘... I have proposed to M. D’Eon, in compliance with your
    wishes, again to attach him to the Court of Russia; but he
    says that he will not serve other master than the King for all
    the gold in the world; that he is sensible of his obligations
    towards you, and that he is too respectfully devoted to you to
    think of seeking elsewhere the rewards you will bestow upon him
    for serving under your orders and to your satisfaction as he is
    now doing.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _The Cardinal’s Reply._

                                        ‘Versailles, August 1, 1758.

    ‘I cannot do otherwise than approve the motives which induce
    M. D’Eon to refuse employment offered to him by the Court of
    Russia. They are the results of his zeal to the King’s service,
    and of his attachment towards yourself....’[42]

       *       *       *       *       *

    _M. D’Eon to M. Tercier._

    ‘I have given the Marquis de l’Hôpital to understand all my
    reasons, and this without any difficulty. I am satisfied,
    considering his friendship towards me, that he would be sorry
    were I to leave him, and in forfeiting his friendship I should
    gain his secret contempt. I have therefore declared to him,
    not on political grounds, but with all the candour and truth
    of which a Burgundian is capable, that I will never leave the
    service of France for that of all the emperors and empresses
    in the universe, and that no motives can cause me to change my
    way of thinking—neither honours nor riches. I tell you what I
    think. I prefer to live from hand to mouth in France to being
    in the enjoyment of an income of one hundred thousand livres
    in fear and bondage. _Regnare nolo, dum liber non sum mihi._
    This is the profession of my faith. I am satisfied that neither
    the Abbé de Bernis nor you will take my way of thinking amiss.
    Had I a bastard brother, be assured I should prevail upon him
    to accept such an offer, but for myself, who am legitimate,
    I am glad to die like a faithful dog in a ditch in my native
    land.’[43]

       *       *       *       *       *

    _M. D’Eon to the Cardinal de Bernis._

    ‘... Whilst having the honour of thanking you for your good
    intentions, and the prospects you have in view in my behalf, I
    entreat you at once to do me the favour to dismiss me from your
    memory whenever there is a question of my destiny removing me
    entirely from France. Since I came to St. Petersburg, my maxim
    has ever been to keep my back turned upon Siberia, too happy to
    have escaped being sent there. I long for and look towards my
    native country....’

       *       *       *       *       *

    _The Cardinal de Bernis to M. D’Eon._

                                        ‘Versailles, August 1, 1758.

    ‘... You will be informed by the Marquis de l’Hôpital that,
    far from being distressed at your refusal to accept the post
    offered to you at the Court of Russia, the motives which induce
    you not to accept it meet with entire approbation. Continue
    to serve his Majesty with the same zeal you have hitherto
    displayed. It will at all times be a pleasure to me to bring to
    the favourable notice of the King your services, your labours,
    and your abilities.’[44]

[Sidenote: HONOUR AND REWARD.]

It was not at the hands of the Empress of Russia that D’Eon cared to
receive honours. For his important services at the Court of that monarch
he was promoted by Louis XV. to the rank of captain of dragoons, and
awarded a pension of two hundred ducats, to be paid by the Count de
Broglio out of the secret service money.

In the course of this year D’Eon found time to publish a work, in
two volumes, entitled ‘Confédérations Historiques sur les Impôts des
Egyptiens, des Babyloniens, des Perses, des Grecs, des Romains, et sur
les différentes situations de la France, par rapport aux Finances, depuis
l’établissement des Francs dans la Gaule jusqu’à present.’[45]




CHAPTER III.

    Progress of the war—The Duke de Choiseul’s designs against
    England—Change of policy—D’Eon’s advice to the French
    ambassador—Approved by Louis XV.—D’Eon’s failing health—The
    Marquis de l’Hôpital—Baron de Breteuil admitted to the secret
    correspondence—The King’s secret orders to D’Eon—Testimonies
    to his abilities—Leaves Russia for the last time—Gift
    from the Empress—On the staff of the Marshal and Count
    de Broglio—Distinguished services during the campaign of
    1761—Exile of the Broglios—Death of Elizabeth.


Apraxin’s defection was a fine thing for Frederick. Two great events
followed—the humiliating defeat of the French at Rosbach (October 31),
by Seidlitz and his cavalry, shall we say? and the battle of Leuthen
(December 5), in which eighty thousand Austrians were worsted by thirty
thousand Prussians. And thus ended the campaign of 1757. The following
year Field-Marshal Fermor, Apraxin’s successor, entered Eastern Prussia,
occupied Königsberg, and was beaten by Frederick at Zorndorff (August 25,
1758). Prince Soltikoff, who replaced Fermor, was also about to lose a
battle at Künersdorff (August 12, 1759); but the day ended happily for
him, his ninety thousand men having almost annihilated the forty-eight
thousand Prussians by whom he was opposed.

This much of what the Russians did, and we shall have got to the end of
1759, after an illustration, from concurrent testimony, of D’Eon’s share
in the progress of the war.

Let us first turn to the pages of Vandal.[46]

[Sidenote: FRENCH DESIGNS ON ENGLAND.]

On December 30, 1758, was signed by Louis XV. and Maria Theresa a treaty
in confirmation of their previous treaty still in force, except that it
determined with greater precision respective obligations; France, for
instance, binding herself to keep an army of 100,000 men in Germany.
Elizabeth was invited to join, and she did so. Of this matter the
Duke de Choiseul, for some months Minister for Foreign Affairs, was
completely ignorant. There was a time, it was but short, when the duke
in his patriotic desire to recover influences lost to France through the
feeble administration of the Cardinal de Bernis, his predecessor, had
determined upon not entertaining any idea of capitulating with England,
so long as soldiers, guns and ships remained, and on prosecuting the war
against Prussia until France met with success. A partisan of Austria, his
feelings towards Russia were of a different nature, but he was wisely
inclined to turn to the best account the alliance with those Powers. As
regards Russia, he instructed the ambassador at St. Petersburg (January
9, 1759) to tell Woronzoff, for the information of the Empress, that
if the King were to desire peace for the happiness of his people and
the repose of Europe, it should only be on conditions honourable to his
Majesty and his allies, and which would ensure general tranquillity; but
that so far from contemplating such a thing, every arrangement was made
for effectively continuing the war during the present and a succeeding
campaign, to the end of bringing the enemy to just and reasonable terms.
That the Empress might have undoubted proofs of his Majesty’s sentiments
on the subject, and to do away with every possible misunderstanding, the
King was disposed to conclude, jointly with the two Empresses, or with
the Empress of Russia alone, such convention as might be considered
necessary for strengthening their union, thereby giving fresh assurances
that his Majesty would only act in concert with his allies, communicating
with them on all points with that entire confidence which should exist
between Powers bound by friendly ties, and whose interests were in common.

Unable to cope with Great Britain on the seas, the Duke de Choiseul
formed a plan of invasion, in which he sought the co-operation of Russia
and Sweden, whose spheres of action would be the Scottish coast. ‘Should
fifty thousand men perish in the first expedition,’ he wrote to Count
Bernstorff, ‘the King has signed the determination to send other fifty
thousand, and we shall not be discouraged so long as we have men in
France.’[47] The hesitations of those Powers, the destruction of the
French fleets in the East Indies, off Cape Lagos, and in Quiberon Bay,
and of the flotilla prepared for the invasion of England, upset the whole
of the duke’s schemes, and gave him good cause to change his tactics.
He would now hail peace if he could. He turned to de l’Hôpital (July 8,
1759), and desired him to seize an early opportunity for feeling his way
with the Grand Chancellor, and suggesting to that minister, as a private
opinion of his own, the desirability of Russia’s mediation between
Austria and Prussia, whereby she would secure to herself the gratitude
of Europe. De Choiseul believed that if the Germanic Powers could but
arrange their differences, Russia might become useful in bringing about
an understanding between France and England.

[Sidenote: THE DUKE DE CHOISEUL AT FAULT.]

De l’Hôpital—gouty, good-natured, and easy-going—had made it a practice
never to act without first consulting his confidential secretary. That
secretary, at the present time, was D’Eon, who recommended that no notice
whatever should be taken of the minister’s letter. De l’Hôpital agreed.
At the expiration of a couple of months de Choiseul again wrote, this
time impatiently and reproachfully.

    ‘Allow me to tell you, my dear Marquis, that you amuse
    yourself somewhat too much at playing the ambassador, and that
    you do not sufficiently attend to its responsibilities. My
    despatch, No. 48, will have given you some idea of the King’s
    system, which, however, you have not as yet turned to profit.
    Apparently, you have not been able to do so, but you should
    have informed me whether you understand, and how you understand
    his Majesty’s instructions upon a project as delicate as it
    is advantageous. Reflect seriously upon it; I speak to you as
    a friend, I unfold to you our system, and if you are not so
    thoroughly satisfied with it as we are, you are too good a
    servant to the King not to say so; and in such a case, since
    you do not wish to change your ideas, t’were far better that
    you should, under pretext of illness, give up your Embassy
    rather than be employed in a task, of the advantages of which
    you are not persuaded. This avowal on your part would, I assure
    you, please the King as much as your success, for which we
    hope, in the negotiations. The Marchioness de l’Hôpital has
    spoken to me of your desire to be created a duke; I wish with
    all my heart I could serve you. Enable yourself to solicit this
    favour by the obligations under which the King will be to you.
    I tell you simply this: there are but two ways; either to carry
    out the views contained in the despatch No. 48, and in this
    private letter, or come away. I prefer the first to the last,
    but the last will also succeed if you promptly give up the
    first, for I shall certainly represent that you cannot return
    without receiving some special reward.’[48]

We will let D’Eon lift the veil of Louis XV.’s diplomacy in his own
words:—

    ‘In 1759, the Duke de Choiseul had prevailed upon the Empress
    of Russia, by means of negotiations through the Marquis de
    l’Hôpital, to offer her mediation towards securing peace, when
    I at the same time received the King’s orders to use my best
    efforts with the Empress, and the Grand Chancellor Woronzoff,
    to prevail upon her Majesty to withdraw her mediation, and
    to exhort her to continue the war, without allowing the Duke
    de Choiseul or the Marquis de l’Hôpital to know what I was
    about—all of which I executed to the great satisfaction of the
    King, as I can prove by evidence bearing his signature; and for
    these incontestable facts I appeal to the reliable testimony of
    the Count de Broglio.’[49] ‘... It was I, who, by secret orders
    from my master, unknown to the great Choiseul, caused the late
    war to last three years longer.’[50]

Turning again to Vandal, we find the King’s approval of D’Eon’s counsel
to de l’Hôpital, and verification of the former’s statement in the
paragraph above quoted.

    ‘No reference is here made, either to the instructions sent
    to the Marquis de l’Hôpital, directing him to enter upon
    negotiations for terminating the German war, by means of, and
    by the mediation of the Empress of Russia, or to what has
    prevented them. The inconvenience which might have resulted
    from the influence and dangerous preponderance which Russia
    would in this way have acquired, and the real advantages she
    would have procured for herself, are too well known to be
    repeated here. It is, therefore, a matter for congratulation,
    so far as the interests of the King are concerned, that the
    Marquis de l’Hôpital, yielding in this instance to the prudent
    advice of the Sieur D’Eon, had allowed the opportunity to slip,
    which he had been eagerly enjoined to seize.’[51]

[Sidenote: DISLIKE TO RUSSIA.]

Four years of anxious and hard toil in a climate which did not suit him
had told on D’Eon’s health, until he felt seriously inconvenienced from
scurvy and an affection of the eyes, and his return to France became
but a question of time. He was longing for home. Apart from his dislike
to life at Court, where he felt that ‘it was impossible for a simply
virtuous, non-intriguing and dispassionate man to succeed,’ he had made
up his mind that Russia was not a country for a freeman to live in. He
could not forget that he and five other officers attached to the Embassy
had to lay aside their uniforms, to avoid the insults offered by soldiers
and people of the lower class, at times when France was meeting with
reverses, such as those at Rosbach and Minden; and the mortification he
endured at hearing the Empress’ words of comfort to his chief, the French
ambassador. It was reported that D’Eon had determined upon not remaining
in Russia because he had seen the daughter of Pope Urban X. (_sic_), who
was married to the gardener of a boyar, receive twenty blows with a stick
for several days consecutively; and because the said boyar and thirty
other boyars were broken on the wheel, two years afterwards, for their
share in some Court broil. He mentions this report of himself without
adding any comment, but relates an anecdote which clearly confirms his
unfavourable opinion of the country he was in. A Russian nobleman said to
him one fine summer’s day:—

    ‘Sir, all Europe is exasperated against us; but look around,
    where you will, and you see beautiful fertile plains teeming
    with corn and game.’ ‘Prince,’ replied D’Eon, ‘I see a crow
    yonder on the plain, and I regret that I have not my gun with
    me. I would shoot it off-hand, because, having wings, it
    remains in a country of slavery, instead of making use of them
    and flying away into Poland, a land of liberty!’[52]

D’Eon applied for permission to resign on the score of ill-health, and
to be allowed to join his regiment, but his departure was necessarily
postponed until a suitable successor could be found. For his own part
de Choiseul became convinced that de l’Hôpital was no longer fitted for
the post of ambassador at St. Petersburg, an opinion shared by the King
for quite different reasons, which need not be entered into here. De
l’Hôpital, however, was an old and faithful servant to the Crown and
deserving of every consideration, so that it was felt to be impossible
to recall him abruptly, and such a step was likely to give offence to
the Empress, who had taken a fancy to him, and received him at her
Court with favour and distinction. As a solution of the difficulty, de
Choiseul conceived the idea of appointing a colleague to the marquis with
subordinate rank, who should eventually succeed him on his resignation,
which, considering his age and increasing infirmities, could not long be
delayed. This colleague should be a personal friend of his own, to whom
he might confide and entrust his policy and intentions, and he nominated
the Baron de Breteuil, a young man of twenty-seven, of distinguished
appearance and refined manners. The Count de Broglio, however, also had
his candidate, M. Durand, a gentleman attached to the Embassy at Warsaw,
the King’s secret agent in that capital, initiated in the system, well
conversant in Russian affairs, and therefore eminently qualified to
serve the King’s private interests at the Court of Russia in the room of
D’Eon. This nomination the duke resolutely refused to entertain. He had
undeniably good cause to suspect the existence of some occult influence
to his disadvantage, having already found himself thwarted in his plans,
in various quarters, without being able to trace the obstruction to its
source, and had determined upon carrying his point, which he completely
succeeded in doing, by prevailing upon the King to sign the Baron de
Breteuil’s credentials as minister plenipotentiary. No sooner had the
minister’s choice become an irrevocable fact, than the Count de Broglio
and Tercier urged upon the King the expediency of admitting the baron
to the secret correspondence, and informing him that he should best be
pleasing his master by not carrying out the orders of the minister. The
King had great objection to the admission of new disciples, but there
appeared to be no alternative, and after a little hesitation his Majesty
yielded to the recommendations of his advisers.[53]

[Sidenote: THE BARON DE BRETEUIL.]

    _Louis XV. to the Baron de Breteuil._

                                                 ‘February 26, 1760.

    ‘Monsieur le Baron de Breteuil,—In consideration of the
    favourable reports I have received with reference to yourself,
    I have decided upon nominating you my minister plenipotentiary
    in Russia, and admitting you to a secret correspondence with
    me, which I have never wished to conduct through my Minister
    for Foreign Affairs. The Count de Broglio, who will deliver
    to you this letter, and M. Tercier, are alone concerned
    in the management, and you will accept whatever they may
    say to you as coming from me. You will deliver to them the
    instructions you have already received, and which you will
    yet receive from the Duke de Choiseul before your departure,
    and you will communicate to them any verbal instructions you
    may have received from him, upon the subject of your mission,
    so that being acquainted thereupon, they may prepare special
    and secret instructions, from their knowledge of my wishes,
    on the affairs of Russia and Poland. Those instructions will
    be supplied to you with all despatch, so soon as I shall have
    approved them.

    ‘In the meantime, I order you to postpone your departure until
    you receive them, under any pretext convenient to yourself,
    and I charge you, at your peril, to keep this secret from
    everybody, no matter who, with the exception of the Count de
    Broglio and M. Tercier, and I rely upon your fidelity and your
    obedience.[54]

                                                             LOUIS.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Louis XV. to M. D’Eon._

    ‘Sieur D’Eon,—Reasons of a private nature, in addition to my
    confidence in the abilities of the Baron de Breteuil and in
    his zeal for my service, have induced me to make known to him
    the direct correspondence I hold with Russia, unknown to my
    Minister for Foreign Affairs, and to my ambassador. He is also
    informed of your having been admitted to this secret, for the
    purpose of facilitating the correspondence, as well as for
    communicating to me, directly, such particulars as you may
    consider it necessary to lay before me. The exactitude with
    which you have acquitted yourself of this duty, so far as your
    position and the distances that divide places have enabled
    you, satisfies me that you will afford me fresh proofs of your
    zeal during the stay of the Baron de Breteuil at the Court of
    Petersburg. I have given him to understand it is my intention
    that you should serve under his orders as secretary, for the
    sole purpose of carrying on the secret correspondence. You will
    receive a salary of three thousand livres from the Minister
    for Foreign Affairs, to which I will add two hundred ducats
    annually, as a mark of my satisfaction at the manner in which
    you have served me, and because I rely upon your continuing
    to do so. You will communicate to the Baron de Breteuil, with
    the greatest exactitude of which you are capable, laying aside
    partiality and prejudice, all the ideas you have formed on
    the character of the Empress of Russia, of her ministers,
    and of those who are employed in public affairs. You will
    also communicate your views on the conduct pursued from the
    commencement of the war to the present time, and what you
    believe might have been done to ensure success to the common
    cause, and what it is that has retarded it. You will write
    out the whole of this in a memorandum which you will give
    him, sending to me a copy, in cypher, by the earliest safe
    opportunity; in fact, you will communicate to him everything
    that you may consider of benefit to my service, whether as
    regards the past or the future. You will, however, await the
    information he will give you upon the subject of his secret
    instructions, that you may supply yourself with a copy, and
    take into consideration the best means to be adopted for their
    being carried out successfully. They will serve as your guide
    in all you will say, whether as regards what has been done or
    what is to be done.

    ‘This, my mark of confidence in the Baron de Breteuil, is a
    proof of how fully I am persuaded that he will execute my
    orders with zeal and ability. Notwithstanding the sincerity of
    his intentions, which I do not doubt, it is just possible that
    he may err as to the means to be adopted for giving effect to
    my secret instructions; you will in such a case expose to him,
    deferentially, your views.[55]

    ‘In the King’s hand. Approved 7th March, 1760.’

[Sidenote: FAILING HEALTH.]

On August 23, 1760, de l’Hôpital informed the Minister for Foreign
Affairs that M. Poissonnier,[56] the Empress’s private physician,
had recommended D’Eon’s instant departure from Russia, his ailments
threatening serious consequences.

    ‘I have already had the honour of acquainting you with M.
    D’Eon’s services and abilities. I entreat that you will be good
    enough to recommend him to the favourable notice of the King,
    and ask his Majesty to reward his services and zeal by granting
    him a pension equal to the whole or part of the annual salary
    he has enjoyed since he has been with me.’

In a private communication to the same minister, de l’Hôpital reminded
the duke that D’Eon’s services in foreign affairs were well known; he
had not a little contributed to a renewal of the alliance with Russia,
and had exerted himself with zeal equal to his activity and intelligence.
Such men were deserving of the protection of ministers such as he was,
and of the favours he had a right to expect.... The state of poor
D’Eon’s health was unsatisfactory, and his private affairs were in a bad
condition; and yet his family had long and usefully served the King and
State.[57]

    ‘I cannot write in too high terms of his merits, his industry,
    and integrity,’ said de l’Hôpital in a letter to the Minister
    for War; ‘he seems bent on following a military career....
    He is anxious to serve in a regiment of foot by purchase of
    a captain’s commission.... You must remember that in 1757 he
    brought to you a treaty and the news of the battle of Prague,
    with a broken leg, and diligence that astonished you.... I
    will answer for it that M. D’Eon will never disgrace his
    supporters....’

The old marquis followed up these strong recommendations of his young
friend with a graceful tribute to his mother at Tonnerre.

    ‘Madame,—I send back to you a son worthy of all your
    tenderness; I feel that I should give him back to you, so that
    we may preserve him for the King’s service, for yourself, and
    for me.... I could not part with your son without giving you a
    proof of my sincere friendship and esteem for him....’

       *       *       *       *       *

    _The Baron de Breteuil to the Duke de Choiseul._

                                    ‘St. Petersburg, August 2, 1760.

    ‘... This secretary was sent here secretly by M. Rouillé
    together with the Chevalier Douglas, at the commencement of
    the negotiations with this Court. M. de l’Hôpital is greatly
    concerned. I have known him only since my arrival here, but
    he appears to me to be steady, clever, and talented, and one
    who has applied himself with advantage to political affairs,
    and to special acquaintance with this country.... He has gained
    the esteem and friendship of a great many persons at this
    Court.’[58]

[Sidenote: FINAL DEPARTURE FROM RUSSIA.]

Previous to quitting the capital, D’Eon went to Peterhof to take leave of
the Empress, who required he should promise to return to Russia so soon
as he had recovered his health. In parting from Woronzoff, the colleague
with whose aid he had accomplished so much, the Grand Chancellor said:—

    ‘I am sorry you are going away, even though your first trip
    here, with Douglas, cost my Sovereign more than two hundred
    thousand men and fifteen million roubles.’ ‘I agree,’
    replied D’Eon, ‘but your Excellency should at the same time
    admit, that your Sovereign and your Excellency yourself have
    thereby acquired fame and glory that will last as long as the
    world.’[59]

D’Eon carried away with him a souvenir from the Empress, consisting of a
snuff-box with her cipher in diamonds.

Sick and faint, D’Eon left St. Petersburg for the third and last time in
August 1760, taking with him the ratifications to the Treaty of December
30, 1758, and the ratifications to the Maritime Convention concluded
between Russia, Sweden, and Denmark. Travelling through Finland, Livonia,
Courland, Poland, and Hungary, as fast as horses could carry him, he
reached Vienna completely exhausted and scarcely able to move. His
friend, the Count de Choiseul,[60] received him in comfortable quarters
and supplied all his wants; but he was restless and impatient to complete
his journey, which he did in equally imprudent haste. Sickening of
small-pox at Paris, a long illness and convalescence entirely unfitted
him during several months for any kind of employment.

Upon his recovery, D’Eon was received by the King, who was pleased to
confer upon him a life pension of two thousand livres, under warrant
dated December 24, 1760, ‘in acknowledgment of his zeal and ability
as secretary of Embassy in Russia, a post he has held for several
years,’[61] and by the following February he was well enough to be able
to realise his dearest and long-deferred wish, that of active service on
the field. He requested the Minister for War to transfer him from his
own regiment, the dragoons of the Colonel-General, doing duty on the
coasts of France, to the regiment of dragoons of the Marquis d’Autichamp,
in the army on the Upper Rhine, and applied for permission to serve as
aide-de-camp to the Marshal and the Count de Broglio, with both of which
solicitations the Minister readily complied, the King specially approving
of D’Eon’s being on the staff of those officers, remarking that they
should know where to find him if he were wanted.[62] This appointment
was a great compliment, for the marshal was intractable in the selection
of officers to serve on his staff, and most punctilious in surrounding
himself with scions of the noblest families.[63]

[Sidenote: DISTINGUISHED MILITARY SERVICES.]

We first hear of D’Eon after joining the army as having been present at
the battle of Villinghausen,[64] then with the French force that crossed
the Weser on August 19. He was under orders that day to remove the powder
waggons to a place of safety on the opposite side of the river, and this
under the heavy fire of the enemy—‘a perilous operation,’ as allowed
by the Duke de Broglie; and being across he was to find the Count de
Guerchy, and deliver to that officer a written order from the marshal.

    ‘The Marshal requests the Count de Guerchy to cause the
    immediate distribution by the storekeeper, amongst the brigades
    of infantry on the right bank of the Weser, of four hundred
    thousand cartridges, deposited in a place that M. D’Eon, the
    bearer of this note, will point out.

    ‘Done at Höxter, August 19, 1761.

                                             ‘THE COUNT DE BROGLIO.’

    ‘P.S.—It is desirable that a staff officer should at once
    accompany M. D’Eon to effect this distribution to the troops
    under your orders.’[65]

Had de Guerchy promptly carried out the marshal’s instructions the
ammunition would have been instantly removed, the enemy’s fire would have
ceased, and the lives of one officer and several grenadiers, occupying
a redoubt which covered the two bridges of boats on the Weser, to the
right and left of Höxter, would have been spared. But upon reading the
note the general preferred to gallop out of the way, shouting, as he
went: ‘If you have a supply of ammunition, you have only to remove it to
a park of artillery you will find at half a league’s distance.’ D’Eon
gave spur after him, saying, that since he did not wish to, or was
unable to execute the marshal’s order, he might return it, and he should
do his best to execute it or cause it to be executed. ‘Take the order,
sir,’ said de Guerchy, returning the note, ‘and carry it out according to
your own judgment.’ The enemy’s fire being largely directed to where the
powder waggons had been removed, and there being no time to lose, D’Eon
took it upon himself to distribute the cartridges, with the assistance of
several officers of artillery who had volunteered their services.[66]

D’Eon was next engaged in a reconnaissance and action at Ultrop, where
he was wounded in the head and thigh; and later (November 7), when at
the head of the grenadiers of Champagne and of a body of Swiss, he
dislodged the Scottish highlanders in the gorge of the mountain at
Einbeck, near Meintos, and pursued them to the English camp; a service
he performed with the greatest difficulty, owing to the tenacity of the
enemy in keeping up a rapid fire. In the latter engagement he carried the
following despatch:—

    _The Count de Broglio to the Marshal de Broglio._

    ‘On nearing the village of Eime, I found the Marquis de
    Lostanges watching the advanced posts of the enemy, which he
    took to be their rear-guard, with the cavalry, carabineers, and
    other troops he had with him during the night. I united him
    with M. Despies and the six battalions of grenadiers. We agreed
    upon the plan for attacking this pretended rear-guard, and
    drove it back beyond the village of Meintos. M. de Lostanges,
    who commanded the right column, was the first to perceive the
    enemy’s camp in two lines, masking the two roads to Vikensen
    and Kapelagen on a level with Furvol; this retarded our
    projects. It being already late and the days now short we
    purpose retreating. I send M. D’Eon to withdraw the Swiss and
    grenadiers of Champagne, who are holding in check the Scottish
    highlanders lining the wood on the crest of the mountain,
    whence they have caused us much annoyance. I say no more,
    because M. D’Eon, who will afterwards give you this note, will
    himself relate the incidents of this attack. I send him off at
    once that he may have time to look for you and find you before
    night.

                                             ‘THE COUNT DE BROGLIO.’

    ‘Written on the field of battle near the village of Meintos, in
    the gorge of the mountains of the camp of Einbeck, November 7,
    1761.’

At Osterwiek, some six to seven hundred Frankish Prussians having
intercepted communication with Wolfenbüttel, which was being besieged by
Marshal Xavier de Saxe, M. de Saint-Victor was ordered to dislodge them
from their position with a few volunteers, twenty hussars, and eighty
dragoons of the regiment of d’Autichamp and of de la Ferronaye, in charge
of D’Eon. The little detachment of horse was bravely led, and the exploit
proved a brilliant one, for the enemy’s battalion was completely routed
and every man made a prisoner.

The dispute between the Marshals de Soubise and de Broglio as to who
was in the right and who in the wrong at the battle of Villinghausen,
had never come to an end; for de Broglio, as became the first soldier
of France, refused to be put on a par with the hero of Rosbach. The
campaign of 1761 being virtually over, de Broglio felt it was quite time
the matter were resolved; and having obtained permission to return to
Versailles, hoping to justify his conduct in person, he delivered to
the Duke de Choiseul, now Minister for War, for delivery to the King,
a lengthy statement particularising the events of July 15 and 16; but
the Marquise de Pompadour had taken care that her favourite should not
be the sufferer, and nothing the marshal could have urged was likely to
serve his cause, or alter de Pompadour’s determination to punish him.
His Majesty disapproved of the marshal’s ‘Mémoire’ as being contrary
to the interests of his service and a bad example in his kingdom, and
ordered him to retire to his country seat, there to remain until further
notice.[67]

On leaving Cassel for Versailles, the Marshal and Count de Broglio were
accompanied by their aide-de-camp D’Eon, who separated himself from
the army never to return to it, through no fault, however, or wish of
his own. Short as was his military career, it was at least brilliant,
the qualities he displayed of a brave soldier meeting with the high
commendation of his superiors, to whom he had become so closely attached
by the nature of his duties.

    ‘We certify that M. D’Eon de Beaumont, captain of the regiment
    of dragoons of d’Autichamp, formerly Caraman, has served under
    our orders as our aide-de-camp; that during the whole of the
    campaign of 1761 we very frequently employed him in carrying
    the orders of the general, and that he has, upon several
    occasions, given proofs of the greatest intelligence and of the
    greatest valour; notably at Höxter, in executing, in presence
    of, and under the fire of, the enemy, the perilous operation
    of removing the powder and other stores of the King; at the
    reconnaissance and at the battle of Ultrop, where he was
    wounded in the thigh; and near Osterwiek[68] where, as second
    captain of a troop of eighty dragoons, under the orders of M.
    de Saint-Victor, commanding the volunteers of the army, they
    charged the Frankish Prussian battalion of Rhes with such
    effect and determination that they took them prisoners of war,
    notwithstanding the superior number of the enemy.

    ‘In testimony whereof, we have delivered to him this
    certificate, signed with our hand, countersigned by our
    secretary, and have affixed thereunto our seals.

    ‘Done at Cassel, December 24, 1761.

                                  ‘L.S. The Marshal Duke de Broglio.
                                  ‘L.S. The Count de Broglio.

                                                 ‘By Order, DROUET.’

It was the fate of the Count de Broglio, for no ostensible reason, to
share the exile of his brother, but with that spirit of contradiction
and fickleness inherent in Louis XV., he was retained on the staff of
the secret correspondence and ordered to continue his customary duties,
the King telling Tercier he was _forced_ to act as he did. The truth is
that the King could scarcely do without him, and had felt the force of
the remonstrance the count had the courage to offer when on the point of
leaving Paris for the family estate. ‘Your Majesty may recollect that for
several years past I have foreseen the storm which to-day bursts over me.
The very marks of your Majesty’s favour have gathered it about me,’—words
that were but the echo of others the count had addressed to the King
years before, when similarly misunderstood and suspected by his Majesty’s
ministers.

    ‘... I only know how to obey, and I should never have been
    placed in the position of upholding, even in the smallest
    degree, the reputation I have gained for obstinacy and hardness
    of heart, were I not obliged to execute secret instructions
    that are frequently in opposition to direct orders, with which
    it is difficult to reconcile them....’[69]

We are purposely dwelling on these murmurings of the Count de Broglio
that we may be the better able to show hereafter that he was not the only
victim, amongst the confidential correspondents and agents, to the King’s
caprice and selfish indifference.

[Sidenote: ACCESSION OF CATHERINE II.]

The new year opened with an event—perhaps upon the whole unfortunate for
France—the not altogether unexpected death of Elizabeth (January 5); and
the accession of Peter III. was the signal for a cessation of hostilities
and a complete change of front on the part of Russia. The new Tsar
agreed with Frederick to a truce, which developed into an alliance, and
afforded him the opportunity for gratifying his tastes for all that was
German, and further alienating the respect and sympathy of his people. In
her struggle against her husband, for liberty and even life, Catherine
turned to France for succour—a circumstance that called for decision and
steadfastness of purpose on the part of the French representative at her
Court; but the Baron de Breteuil proved himself unequal to the occasion
by his pusillanimity and hesitation,[70] and Catherine effected her will
independently of French support. The disease was quickly acknowledged and
the remedy as quickly found. De Breteuil was to be replaced by D’Eon upon
the recommendations of the Duke de Choiseul and of the Count de Broglio,
although on different grounds; the King readily approving, because in him
would be combined with the minister plenipotentiary what was of greatest
importance to his Majesty—a well-tried secret correspondent.[71] Other
events, however, bid fair to change these plans. The Emperor was disposed
of, and Catherine, in grasping the sceptre, said: ‘If I go to war it
will be to suit my own convenience, and not to please others, as was the
case with the Empress Elizabeth.’ From various causes Louis XV. refused
to continue with Catherine the secret correspondence he had entertained
with her predecessor, and D’Eon’s services were consequently no longer
required at the Russian capital. De Breteuil was suffered to remain at
his post until, too glad to escape the ever-increasing difficulties of
his position, he was removed, at his own request, to Stockholm.




CHAPTER IV.

    Portrait of Catherine II.—Her opinion of D’Eon and
    its fidelity—Portrait of Lord Sandwich—Of the Duke de
    Nivernois—D’Eon, secretary of Embassy in London—Two ‘smart
    pieces of work’—Kindness to French prisoners—Treaty of
    Peace with England—D’Eon takes the ratifications to
    Versailles—Delight of King and Ministers—The Marquise de
    Pompadour—The Count de Guerchy nominated ambassador at St.
    James’—The Duke de Praslin’s estimate of his qualities—The Duke
    tests D’Eon’s loyalty towards himself—The Prince de Soubise at
    Villinghausen—D’Eon’s respect for the Broglios—Is invested with
    the Cross of Saint Louis.


Among D’Eon’s acquirements was accuracy in the delineation of portrait
character, amusement in which he freely indulged. Describing Catherine
II. during the last days of Peter’s short reign, he says:—

    ‘The Empress is of prepossessing appearance; she is generally
    of an amiable disposition, although very cunning, intriguing,
    and vindictive. Her greatest ambition is to control affairs of
    importance; she is competent for administration. Her sympathies
    are entirely English, although she speaks French with great
    facility of expression. She is very fond of reading, and most
    of her time, since her marriage, has been spent in devouring
    the works of such modern French and English authors as treat
    most vigorously and most liberally on morality, nature, and
    religion. A work condemned in France is sure to meet with her
    entire approval. She is never without the works of Voltaire,
    ‘De l’Esprit’ of Helvetius, encyclopædias, and the writings of
    Jean Jacques Rousseau. She prides herself on her courage, on
    being strong-minded and a philosopher; in a word, she is by
    nature a little _savante_. She suggests to her husband changes
    that may result in the fall of this Emperor of apes, in the
    hope of reigning in his stead as regent.’[72]

Notwithstanding the sagacity and exactitude, to use the Duke de Broglie’s
own words, with which this portrait is drawn, testifying to a certain
amount of personal knowledge of the subject, the duke, in support of his
theory that D’Eon could not at any time have been reader (_lectrice_)[73]
to Elizabeth, reproduces a letter of questionable accuracy from Catherine
II. to Grimm, to show how complete a cipher he must have been at the
Russian Court. It is dated April 13, 1778.

    ‘The Empress Elizabeth never had a reader’ (_lectrice_) wrote
    her Majesty, ‘and M. or Mademoiselle D’Eon was not better
    known to her than to me, who have only known him as a sort of
    political drudge (_galopin politique_) in the service of the
    Marquis de l’Hôpital and of the Baron de Breteuil.’[74]

[Sidenote: CATHERINE’S DEPRECIATION OF D’EON.]

We need not stop to inquire why the Empress Catherine, attached as she
was, when grand-duchess, to the party against which all D’Eon’s assaults,
by command of his sovereign, were directed; and who sat up for nights,
translating into French from the Russian, for the edification of Sir
Hanbury Williams, all such decisions of the Council as were favourable to
France, should have thus expressed herself with regard to the secretary
of a brilliant French Embassy; and this in his adversity, twenty-two
years after his certain appearance at the Court of Russia for the first
time. Apart from D’Eon’s own observation that he dined occasionally
at the table of the grand-duke, there exists a letter which tends to
controvert the assertion of her Majesty.

    _The Marquis de l’Hôpital to M. D’Eon._

                                       ‘Plombières, August 13, 1762.

    ‘... And so the bully[75] has ceased to exist! What a page he
    will fill in history! Now let us see to the new Catherine.
    She has all the courage and the qualities requisite for
    making a great Empress, and I have agreeable recollections of
    having heard you frequently say so; her firmness, on certain
    occasions, has always been to your taste. It should also be
    admitted that you discovered the hidden virtues of the Princess
    Dashkoff; it is true that you have known her and cultivated
    her friendship since her earliest youth, and that you and the
    Chevalier Douglas encouraged her romantic temperament.’[76]

We have here, at any rate, the testimony of the French ambassador to
D’Eon’s personal knowledge of the Empress Catherine, and of his intimacy
with the Princess Dashkoff,[77] of whom we will have something to say
hereafter.

In taking leave of Russia and its concerns, as we must now do, we are
brought to the close of the Seven Years’ War, and our attention turns
for a time to the relations of France with Great Britain during the
administration of Lord Bute.

[Sidenote: THE EARL OF SANDWICH.]

The preliminaries of the notable peace of 1763, between France and
England, were signed at Fontainebleau on November 3, 1762, the ambassador
selected to conduct the negotiations in England being the Duke de
Nivernois, once ambassador at Rome, and sent to Berlin in trying
circumstances (1756) to endeavour to treat with Frederick. Gaillardet and
the Duke de Broglie fall into the same singular error in attributing to
this nobleman a portrait by D’Eon, the latter adding disdainfully—‘the
portrait was in all probability one that pleased D’Eon, for in his
official correspondence the same is applied, word for word, to Lord
Sandwich.’ That it was intended for the libertine English peer, of whom
it was said

    Search earth, search hell, the devil cannot find
    An agent, like Lothario, to his mind,

is clear enough, although even upon its first appearance the Duke de
Praslin thought fit to apply the sketch to himself, and showed his
resentment towards the author of it in a very tangible manner.

    ‘Sincerity and cheerfulness are the chief characteristics of
    this minister, who in every office and embassage enjoyed by
    him has always appeared, like Anacreon, crowned with roses and
    singing of joys in the midst of the most arduous labours. He
    is by nature inclined to idleness; nevertheless, he toils as
    if unable to live at rest, and abandons himself to this easy
    and idle life so soon as he feels he is free. His natural
    capacities and his happy state of cheerfulness, his sagacity
    and his activity in affairs of importance, never give him cause
    for uneasiness, nor do they produce _wrinkles on his forehead_;
    and although it is necessary to have lived a long time with
    a minister to be able to describe his character, to say what
    degree of courage or weakness he possesses, how far he is
    prudent or cunning, I am able to say, from the present moment,
    that —— is shrewd and discerning without being deceitful
    or crafty. He is but little susceptible to hatred and to
    friendship, although on several occasions he has appeared to be
    completely under the influence of the one or the other; for, on
    the one hand, he is separated from his wife, he hates her and
    does her no harm; on the other, he has a mistress, he cherishes
    her and does her no great good. Upon the whole, he is certainly
    one of the merriest and most agreeable ministers in Europe.’[78]

Repudiating the charge of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, D’Eon says:—

    ‘Unable to apply to himself all the good in this portrait, the
    Duke de Praslin has applied to himself all the evil as suiting
    him best; such, for instance, as the wrinkles or horns on his
    forehead, weakness and knavery, the little loved wife, the much
    loved mistress, neither of which is the better nor the worse
    in consequence. M. D’Eon will learn by this how circumspect
    one should be. He will take it as a rule that every time the
    portrait of a ridiculous man at a foreign court is depicted,
    there will always be somebody at Versailles to resemble
    him.’[79]

D’Eon has not left us without a rough outline of the Duke de Nivernois,
to whom he was devotedly attached.

    ‘... His only fault is the coquetry to please everybody;
    coquetry which often secures to us more enemies than true
    friends, but which, notwithstanding, has never chilled the
    sentiments of admiration and gratitude that I have vowed to
    him.... Is any greater proof needed of the coquetry and desire
    to please everybody than this _exemplum_?

    ‘In Paris the duke houses and boards a Jesuit, who dines
    regularly every day at his table; and yet he is a friend of
    thirty years’ standing of the destructor of the Order of
    Jesuits.[80] Whilst in London he absolutely wished to be a
    friend at Court and in favour in the city; a friend of the
    party in the majority, and of the party in the minority;
    he also sought, comically enough, to reconcile the Duke of
    Newcastle and Lord Bute, Mr. Pitt and the Duke of Bedford. He
    was enamoured of thirty thousand maidens, and pretended to be
    dying of love whenever he met the charming Duchess of Grafton,
    and this because the duke, her husband, was one of the leaders
    of the Opposition.’[81]

D’Eon would have preferred a soldier’s career had he been free to choose.
Ministers combined to dissuade him, the Duke de Praslin bidding him
‘hang up his sword,’ there being nothing for him to do in the army, and
the Duke de Nivernois invited him to become his secretary of Embassy
in London. D’Eon felt that four years’ service as secretary in Russia,
‘under critical and most important circumstances,’ to use de Nivernois’
own words, entitled him rather to advancement, and in accepting the
post in London purely from personal regard for the duke, he took the
liberty of making it a condition that he should return to France with the
ambassador at the termination of his mission.

[Sidenote: ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND.]

Accompanied by this secretary the duke crossed the Channel in September.
When his lean figure appeared at the place of embarkation at Calais, an
English sailor said to his mate, ‘I say, d’ye see how thin that duke
is? I remember him as a fine fat fellow. This is how we’ve skinned the
French swells in the war.’ And so greatly struck by his appearance was an
English gentleman (Mr. C. Townsend, one of the _Flag_ party) on seeing
him for the first time that he exclaimed: ‘What! the French have sent
over the preliminaries of a man to sign the preliminaries of peace!’

In the course of the transactions on the Treaty of Peace, D’Eon executed
a somewhat adroit, though entirely indefensible act, which caused no
little mirth and secret joy at Versailles. The negotiations so happily
commenced met with an obstacle, and being checked in their progress a
sort of crisis supervened, when Mr. Wood, Under Secretary of State,
called on the Duke de Nivernois to confer on certain contested points,
and having his portfolio with him was indiscreet enough to say that it
contained the final instructions and ultimatum which Lord Egremont had
directed him to transmit to the Duke of Bedford, the King’s ambassador at
the Court of Versailles. Upon hearing this the duke looked at D’Eon, and
then cast his eye on the portfolio. D’Eon quickly caught at the sense of
this pantomime. It would be a matter of great importance to the French
Court to know the nature of the instructions and the terms of this ‘fatal
ultimatum.’ He made a sign to the duke, who at once invited Mr. Wood to
stay to dinner and talk over matters. He wished him, he said, to taste
some samples of good wine from Tonnerre.... The bait took, and whilst
the duke and Mr. Wood were enjoying their bumpers, D’Eon extracted from
the portfolio Lord Egremont’s despatches, caused exact copies to be
taken, and forwarded them instantly to Versailles, the French courier
arriving twenty-four hours earlier than Mr. Wood’s. When the Duke of
Bedford called to broach the subject, de Choiseul and de Praslin, already
apprised of the difficulties about to be raised, and of the British
ambassador’s final instructions, were readily enabled to come to terms.
This was a smart piece of work in de Nivernois’ opinion,[82] and de
Praslin declared there was nobody like D’Eon, and that he was quite
deserving of all the King’s favours.

[Sidenote: A HARD-WORKING SECRETARY.]

D’Eon was instrumental in smoothing away another difficulty. The Duke de
Nivernois had altered several articles in the ultimatum of the treaty, an
act which gave umbrage to the English ministers, and Count Viri apprised
him that if he did not withdraw the alterations he might as well leave
the country; to which the duke replied that neither his honour nor
dignity would allow of his withdrawing an ultimatum given in the name of
the King. Matters were looking serious, when D’Eon proposed that the duke
should tell Lords Bute and Egremont of his secretary’s excess of zeal in
making alterations unknown to himself. ‘Every tongue will rail, every
mouth open upon me,’ continued D’Eon. ‘With all my heart; and if you
choose you may also say that you will send me back to France.’ The duke
caught at the idea, and had the generosity to explain to de Praslin and
to the King his indebtedness to D’Eon.[83]

The conduct of the secretary of Embassy during progress of the
negotiations was all that his superiors could desire, and he earned the
gratitude of many a French prisoner by his exertions in administering to
their comfort. Scarcely a letter left the ambassador that was not replete
with the highest encomiums.

    _The Duke de Nivernois to the Duke de Praslin._

    ‘D’Eon is at work as usual from morning to night. I cannot
    sufficiently extol his zeal, vigilance, amiability of
    disposition, and activity.... When the state of my health will
    force me to quit this country, in the spring, I will, with
    your permission, leave our little D’Eon until my successor
    is appointed, and I promise that he will do well and be
    favourably received. He is very active, very discreet, never
    exhibiting curiosity or officiousness; never giving cause for
    mistrust or acting defiantly, _quod est inveniendum_, because
    here the majority of men are like the most unmanageable of
    horses....’[84]

On February 10, 1763, Mr. Richard Neville Neville left Paris for
London with the Treaty of Peace signed that same evening by the
plenipotentiaries of Great Britain, France, and Spain;[85] a treaty that
compelled France to part with all the territory she had acquired in
Germany, England retaining the whole of Canada, Nova Scotia, Cape Breton,
the Gulf and River of St. Lawrence, Grenada, St. Vincent, Dominica,
Tobago, Senegal, some territory to the east of the Mississippi, and
Minorca. Spain received Louisiana from France in exchange for Florida,
given up to England, France being permitted to retain Belle-Isle,
Martinique, and Guadaloupe—also Chandernagor and Pondicherry, on
condition that they should not be fortified, and further engaging to
demolish the defences at Dunkirk.

    ‘Such were the results,’ says an eminent French writer of our
    times, ‘of the Seven Years’ War. Fortunate for England and
    Prussia, of little cost to Austria, to whom an irreparable loss
    was simply made too evident; of no moment to Russia, who had
    availed herself of it for training her army, but most fatal
    to France, which had entrusted her colonies, her navy, her
    finances, and her military honour, to her debased nobles....
    The minister himself who signed the Treaty of Paris will in
    time be considered too intelligent and too proud to be the
    servant of Louis XV. when France, falling a step lower, will
    have passed out of the hands of Madame de Pompadour into the
    still viler hands of Madame Dubarry.’

[Sidenote: TAKES TREATY OF PEACE TO FRANCE.]

It was an unprecedented mark of favour on the part of George III. to
confide to D’Eon the ratifications to the Treaty for conveyance to his
Majesty’s ambassador at Versailles.[86] In announcing to de Praslin the
approaching departure of his secretary on the proud mission, de Nivernois
claimed for him, in accordance with usage, a gratuity of equal value—one
thousand crowns—to that about to be received from his own Government by
Mr. Neville for having brought the Treaty to London. De Praslin insisted
that no English minister would ever think of entrusting such precious
documents to a foreigner; it would be contrary to rule and custom, and it
would therefore be idle to expect that D’Eon should be selected for the
duty. It was the duke’s anxiety, he said, to serve his secretary, that
had blinded him to facts and precedent. D’Eon was still young enough to
be of good service, and he should take care to afford him the opportunity
for earning distinction. When, later, the Foreign Minister had to
acknowledge his mistake, he considered the choice of D’Eon to be a very
straightforward proceeding on the part of the King of England and of his
ministers, who were giving proofs of the nobility of their sentiments,
and inspiring the desire and hope for the establishment and maintenance
of good relations and lasting concord between the two Courts. ‘I am very
glad you were stupid enough[87] to believe it impossible that the French
secretary—my little D’Eon—should be the bearer of the King of England’s
ratifications,’ wrote De Nivernois in reply.[88]

    _The Duke de Nivernois to Louis XV._

                                         ‘London, February 17, 1763.

    ‘Sire,—M. D’Eon, Captain in the d’Autichamp regiment of
    dragoons, and my Secretary of Embassy, takes to the Duke of
    Bedford the ratifications to the Treaty of Peace; it is a
    compliment on the part of the King of England. This prince
    avails himself with pleasure of a Frenchman for so honourable
    and important a mission, and I consider such a step, which is
    out of the usual course, as striking evidence of his desire for
    unity and cordial relations. I cannot refrain, Sire, upon this
    occasion, from bearing witness to the zeal and abilities of M.
    D’Eon, and I must truthfully assure your Majesty that he is in
    every way most worthy of your Majesty’s protection and favour
    as a diplomatist and soldier.’

D’Eon attributed his good luck to the kindness of the King of England,
of Lord Bute, Count Viri, the Duke de Nivernois, and to his own
_savoir-faire_. ‘He brings me luck,’ said Louis XV., who received him
warmly, and shortly afterwards conferred upon him the Cross of the Royal
and Military Order of Saint Louis, a gratuity of six thousand livres, and
raised his salary to the maximum of one thousand crowns. De Praslin was
delighted, said D’Eon was a good-looking fellow, a hard worker who had
performed his mission with great diligence, and awarded him a gratuity
of two thousand crowns. Even the Marquise de Pompadour expressed her
satisfaction, in a letter to de Nivernois, at seeing one who it was said
was an excellent person, and had served his King in several countries,
employed to bring the Treaty to France. She considered it a great act of
politeness on the part of the English to entrust him with the Treaty.
She liked the King of England, who was full of candour and humanity, and
possessed every virtue that constituted a good king.[89]

[Sidenote: THE COUNT DE GUERCHY.]

It had been arranged from the beginning that the Duke de Nivernois’
embassage should end with the completion of the negotiations, the
minister nominated to succeed him being the Count de Guerchy, with whom
we are already acquainted. ‘I must do him the justice to say,’ wrote
the British ambassador in Paris, ‘that de Guerchy has a universal good
character as a soldier and a man of honour.’[90] But the Duke of Bedford
was greatly led into error in this estimate of the character of a
nobleman who was selected regardless of any qualification but that of
rank, his strongest recommendation being his marriage with a lady of the
House of Harcourt, and his only claims to the highest ambassadorial post
in the gift of the King being the favour of the Marquise de Pompadour
and a short period of obscure service in the war. He is described by
Gaillardet as one of those gentlemen who live nobly in noble idleness,
who are charitable until their own purse is touched, ostentatious until
called upon to spend, ambitious of high office for the sake of the title,
and of the title for the sake of the emolument; esteeming a good estate
preferable to a good education; and persuaded that one always knows
enough when of good birth, in good health, and possessing a good income.
De Praslin’s own opinion of the man he was about to employ as ambassador
in London is best gathered from what he says of him to de Nivernois:—

    ‘I am still very much concerned about de Guerchy. I am not
    sure, however, that we are doing him good service by appointing
    him ambassador in London. He is not liked in this country. I
    dread his despatches like fire, and you know how defective
    despatches disparage a man and his office. A minister is often
    judged less by the manner in which he conducts business than
    by the account he gives of it. I believe that our dear friend
    will do well. I do not think I have anybody better fitted. But
    he cannot write at all; we must not deceive ourselves on this
    point.’[91]

De Nivernois was out of health when he accepted the mission to England
at the urgent instance of the King and of his old friend the Count de
Choiseul, shortly afterwards created Duke de Praslin, and he never ceased
to complain of his physical sufferings from the day he began to live
in a climate that did not suit him. He had always hoped to leave ‘his
little D’Eon’ in charge until de Guerchy’s nomination was officially
notified. He trembled for that poor novice in politics when he thought
of the difficulties he should experience in a country where people were
far from being like ordinary men; for this envoy of an absolute monarch,
puzzled and perplexed in all probability at the large distribution of
political power in England, and the number of those who shared in the
responsibilities of government, gave it as his opinion that to conduct
negotiations in the country to which he had been accredited was nothing
short of hard labour!

We cannot resist quoting here, in their place, a few lines from a letter
of de Praslin to his friend in London, which serve to expose, with what
has already been said, the worth and honesty of purpose of the men who
were directing the affairs of France.

    ‘You make me ill, my dear friend, in continually telling me
    that you are so.... it is true that we are both engaged in a
    calling that does not suit us; you will soon be out of it,
    and I assure you that I should be pleased had I a similar
    prospect.’[92]

[Sidenote: THE DUKE DE PRASLIN’S SUSPICIONS.]

The opportunity for leaving D’Eon in charge on the departure of the
ambassador seeming to be lost, de Nivernois recommended him for
appointment as Resident, an arrangement desirable in the interests of the
King’s service, and one which would enable de Guerchy to receive such
valuable assistance as no other person but the secretary of Embassy was
qualified to render, for he was fully competent to continue the work he,
the ambassador, had commenced. D’Eon’s presence was preferable to that of
a stranger. Lord Bute had taken a fancy to him, which was saying a great
deal, and was a piece of luck that might not fall to a new-comer. On the
other hand, D’Eon was being informed by M. Sainte Foy, senior clerk at
the Foreign Office, that it was earnestly desired he should remain with
de Guerchy, and yet de Praslin was slow in paying the smallest attention
to de Nivernois’ frequent recommendations in his favour. De Praslin had
his reasons; he doubted D’Eon’s loyalty towards himself, and suspected
him of being in correspondence with the exiled de Broglios. He should
put him to the test, and how this was accomplished shall be related in
D’Eon’s own words:—

    ‘One evening about midnight, towards the end of March, the
    Duke de Praslin put me through a kind of interrogatory. Sainte
    Foy was a witness. The duke said: “You were at the battle of
    Villinghausen, M. D’Eon; tell me all you saw and all you know
    with regard to that action.” I did so conscientiously, relating
    to him all I saw with my own eyes. My recital not being either
    to his taste or to that of the Count de Guerchy, his satellite,
    who was present, he interrupted me frequently by stamping his
    foot; and rising from his chair he said to me several times:
    “I know it to have been the contrary to what you say, and
    this from one of my intimate friends who was also there.” He
    alluded to the Count de Guerchy. He then looked at Sainte
    Foy. At every reply I made, the duke looked cross and gave a
    sardonic smile. “But, my dear D’Eon, you surely did not witness
    all you relate?” I persisted in assuring him, as I should do
    to my life’s end, that I had perfectly well seen and heard
    what I had told him. The duke concluded by saying: “It is your
    attachment to the de Broglios that makes you speak as you do.”
    “Faith, sir!” I replied; “it is my attachment to the truth. You
    question me, and I can only tell you what I myself know.” After
    we had left the minister, Sainte Foy scolded me in a friendly
    way for my want of policy. “My dear D’Eon,” he said, “I fear
    you will never make your fortune in this country. Be off to
    England as quickly as you can.” “I wish for nothing better,”
    was my reply.’[93]

Eighteen years after the battle of Villinghausen, D’Eon wrote:—

    ‘I maintain in 1779 what I asserted in 1763 at Versailles;
    yes, I say and maintain, notwithstanding my regard for the
    Prince de Soubise, notwithstanding my contempt for the
    Marquise,[94] notwithstanding my indifference as to the good
    or evil the Choiseuls may do to me, that had Soubise’s army
    actually attacked the enemy on the morning of July 16, 1761,
    in compliance with the Marshal de Broglio’s urgent request on
    the nights of July 15 and 16 (of which the Chevalier Nort,
    aide-de-camp to the Marshal, was the bearer), after the
    important advantage obtained by the Marshal at Villinghausen
    the evening of the 15th, it was clear to the whole of de
    Broglio’s army, with the exception of the cowardly fawners to
    the party at that time in power at Court; I say it was clear
    that the English and Hanoverian army would have been beaten and
    irremediably routed. I am far from being wanting in gratitude
    to my protectors and from entertaining the slightest feeling of
    hatred towards the Prince de Soubise. I respect his heart-bred
    virtues as I do his distinguished birth. Had he been as great
    a general as he is brave and attached to his King and country,
    and generous towards his friends and enemies, he would be
    worthy of being at the head of all the armies of Europe. Too
    much kind-heartedness, too much faith in the ignorant and in
    those intriguers who were obsequious to him, restrained him a
    hundred times, as on the morning of July 16, from executing
    what he had wished and what he had already ordered; that is
    to say, to advance on the enemy, to attack and defeat him in
    concert with the Marshal de Broglio.’[95]

A few days after his interview with de Praslin, D’Eon was asked
confidentially by the Duchess de Nivernois if he was not in
correspondence with M. de Broglio. ‘No, madam,’ said D’Eon, ‘and I am
sorry for it, as I am very fond of the Marshal de Broglio, but I do not
wish to trouble him with my letters; I am satisfied with writing to him
on each New Year’s Day.’

‘I am very glad to hear this for your sake, my dear little friend,’
continued the duchess. ‘Let me tell you in confidence that intimacy with
the House of de Broglio might be of injury to you at Court, and in the
mind of de Guerchy, your future ambassador.’

[Sidenote: THE PRINCE DE SOUBISE.]

D’Eon had not strayed from the truth, for it was the Count de Broglio,
whose name had not been mentioned in the two conversations just related,
who was his frequent correspondent, and not the marshal, with whom he
communicated but seldom, supplying him with the news of the day, but
chiefly with Court gossip. Speaking of de Soubise in a letter to the
marshal, D’Eon says:—

    ‘’Twere well if the prince fought the enemy single-handed,
    because this athlete before girding himself for the fight was
    anointed with Court oil only, and it is not adapted to ward off
    the blows of an enemy. It might be said—there is a chance of
    luck, because the fate of arms is uncertain. This is not true.
    The fate of arms is uncertain to a great captain; but to a bad
    captain it is always certain.’[96]

Referring in after years to his interview with de Praslin, on the subject
of the battle of Villinghausen, we find D’Eon saying:—

    ‘They tried to induce or to force me to speak ill of the
    Marshal de Broglio and his campaigns. I could not have done
    so even had I wished it, because I have always known the
    Marshal and his brother to be solely engaged in the interests
    of the King’s service, and in all such plans and operations
    as should best accrue to the advantage and to the glory of
    the French arms, and of those of their allies. The Marshal
    practised every military virtue in his own person, and it
    was an admirable thing to witness that, although beyond the
    reach of all competitors, he contested with himself for glory
    of which he sought to deprive his earlier actions, by the
    performance of still more brilliant deeds. I have always been
    devotedly attached to the late dear Count de Broglio,[97]
    not so much because he liked me and because he was the secret
    minister of Louis XV., but because I ever found in him the _vir
    probus et propositi tenax_ of whom Horace speaks; and this,
    notwithstanding his numerous enemies, or, rather, the number
    of those who envied him for his merits. Ever as brave in the
    Cabinet as on the field, he was at all times faithful to God,
    the King, his country, his brave soldiers and his word. When,
    in days gone by, we were serving together, and he called me
    the _Chevalier Bayard sans peur et sans reproche_, he did so
    because he did not know me as thoroughly and as well as I knew
    him.’[98]

On March 30 D’Eon arrived in London, and was on the same day invested
with the Cross of the Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis[99] by
the Duke de Nivernois, at his own request as had been pre-arranged. He
had brought with him some costly presents from his royal master to the
Count Viri, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Sardinia (well known in
English history as being engaged in secret negotiations with Lord Bute),
in recognition of his valuable services, being the first to mediate for
peace between Great Britain and the two illustrious Houses of Bourbon,
the King’s thanks being conveyed to the Sardinian minister in a letter
from de Praslin.[100]




CHAPTER V.

    D’Eon becomes Resident and Chargé d’Affaires at the British
    Court—Also the King’s special secret agent—Plans for the
    invasion of England—Nicknames to secret correspondents—Louis
    XV.’s letter to D’Eon on the survey of England—De Pompadour
    discovers the secret correspondence—The King’s vexation—D’Eon
    advanced to be Minister Plenipotentiary—How he received his
    new honours—De Broglio’s anxiety for the safety of the King’s
    papers—De Pompadour’s conspiracy to ruin D’Eon—Claims against
    the Crown—Letter of State in favour of D’Eon.


The appointment, dated April 17, of the Chevalier D’Eon as Resident and
Chargé d’Affaires, relieved de Nivernois of his functions and left him
free to return to his home and ‘get rid of the violent and well-seasoned
cold from which he was suffering—an English cold that seemed to have
no end;’ but he delayed his departure for the purpose of proceeding to
Oxford and receiving the degree of Doctor, _in facultate juris_. The
duke, who had never been in England before, declared the journey had
been most instructive to him. He saw some of the finest things in the
world, was greatly astonished at the general high state of cultivation,
and at the absence of poor people in the districts through which he
travelled—the poorest seemed well to do, and would pass for burgesses
in any small French provincial town. De Nivernois left London in May,
travelling leisurely to Dover, chiefly in consequence of the state of his
health, but also from a wish to see places on the road, and especially
Chatham dockyard, and was no doubt the identical French ambassador of
whom Smollett, who posted over the same ground a week or two later,
relates in one of his letters that he was charged forty pounds by a
knave of a publican at Canterbury for a supper that was not worth forty
shillings!

On leaving for England, D’Eon had become the secret correspondent of
Louis XV., with whom and with the Count de Broglio and Tercier he was
to communicate, in cypher or otherwise, as occasion might require, his
instructions being similar in every particular to those he received when
on his earliest journey to St. Petersburg in 1755.

The first duty upon which the Chevalier was engaged in the capacity of
secret agent was to assist in the perfection of a scheme for the invasion
of England, devised by the Count de Broglio, approved by the King, whose
hatred towards England had greatly intensified since the conclusion of
peace, and a task ultimately accomplished to the satisfaction of his
Majesty in the face of numerous difficulties. Two persons were selected
by de Broglio to effect, in concert, the great work in hand—one, the
active agent, was a young officer of Engineers of considerable ability
and established reputation, Carlet de la Rosière, who had served during
the war, and had been attached for a time as aide-de-camp to the Duke de
Broglio. A prisoner of the Prussians, Frederick refused to sanction his
exchange. ‘When an officer of distinction is taken,’ said that monarch,
‘he is retained as long as possible.’[101] The other, the passive agent,
was de la Rosière’s kinsman, the Chevalier D’Eon. The undertaking was
to be completed without the knowledge of any of the King’s ministers,
and besides the two named, one other person only was admitted into the
secret, according to the King’s will.

[Sidenote: SURVEYS FOR THE INVASION OF ENGLAND.]

    ‘M. Durand,—The Count de Broglio having communicated to me the
    ideas you have originated as to the more desirable means to
    be employed for resisting the ambition and arrogance of the
    English nation, I have approved of the plans he has proposed
    to me on this subject, and have ordered him to proceed with
    the work. I have enjoined him not to communicate on the matter
    with anybody except the Sieur D’Eon and Tercier. But as I am
    aware of the knowledge you possess with regard to this object,
    and of the service you can render, I desire to send direct
    word to you, that you are to work in concert with the Count de
    Broglio and the Sieur Tercier in all that concerns this affair,
    and that you will communicate to them all you may find having
    reference thereto, in the depôt of foreign affairs of which you
    are in charge. You will continue to maintain the most profound
    secrecy towards everybody, no matter who, with the exception of
    the persons named above.[102]

                                                             LOUIS.’

    ‘June 5, 1763.’

Every conceivable precaution was taken to avoid discovery and ensure
success, and that de la Rosière might not incur the smallest risk of
detection by papers of a compromising character being found about his
luggage or person, he was ordered to make his periodical reports orally,
if possible, to the Chevalier D’Eon, who was to note and retain them
within the inviolable precincts of the Embassy, of which he was the
_genius loci_. The King was not indifferent to his own safety.

    _Louis XV. to M. Tercier._

    ‘... The Sieur de Rozières runs the risk of being arrested
    in the course of his researches and travels; I do not wish
    that, in such a case, anything in my hand should be found in
    his possession; it is my desire, therefore, that he leaves
    everything with the Sieur D’Eon, who, being officially
    accredited, cannot be arrested in the same manner.’[103]

The special cypher to be employed being considered scarcely sufficient
security, a nickname was assigned to each person likely to be named in
the correspondence:

    The King              _The counsellor._
    Count de Broglio      _The deputy._
    M. Tercier            _The solicitor._
    M. Durand             _Prudence._
    Duke de Nivernois     _The honey-tongued._
    Duke de Praslin       _The bitter-mouthed._
    Duke de Choiseul      _The red lion, or porcelain._[104]
    Count de Guerchy      _The novice, ram, or horned sheep._
    Chevalier D’Eon       _Intrepidity, or the dragoon’s head._[105]

The Chevalier’s instructions were contained in the following letters:—

    _The Count de Broglio to the Chevalier D’Eon._

                                                      ‘May 17, 1763.

    ‘I have to thank you for your zeal and friendship towards my
    brother and myself, for which we are very grateful; we are only
    afraid lest you should follow the impulse of your heart and be
    led into taking some step or forming some design that might
    prove prejudicial to you, and which we should deeply regret. Be
    sure to observe the greatest prudence on this point.... I need
    not speak to you of the new ambassador with whom you have to
    do, for it appears to me that you have already formed a pretty
    correct estimate of his character. I will only add that he
    is the most astute man I know, and at the same time the most
    mistrustful; you therefore cannot be too much upon your guard
    against his suspicious and uneasy disposition. You must make
    such arrangements in the house in which you are living as will
    secure you from being surprised by him or by any other person,
    at such times as you may be engaged in the secret affairs
    entrusted to you by the King. Every precaution should be taken
    to keep all papers connected therewith entirely separate from
    others; and provision should be made for their safety in case
    of death or other accident.’

The count recommended D’Eon to invite his cousin, D’Eon de Mouloise,
to stay with him, so that in the event of any unforeseen circumstance
he might give him charge of the correspondence, with the strictest
injunctions not to pass it on to any person whatsoever, and more
especially not to de Guerchy. The count concluded by recommending to
D’Eon’s protection the Marquis de la Rosière—

    ‘whose governor I appoint you.... It only remains for me to
    testify to the pleasure I experience in having you for one of
    my lieutenants, on service of such importance as is likely to
    contribute to the prosperity and glory of the nation....’[106]

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Louis XV. to the Chevalier D’Eon._

    ‘The Sieur D’Eon will receive through the Count de Broglio or
    M. Tercier, my orders on the surveys to be made in England,
    whether on the coasts or in the interior of that country, and
    he will comply with the instructions he will receive to that
    end, as if he received them direct from me. It is my desire
    that he shall observe the greatest secrecy in this affair, and
    that he will not make any communications thereon to any person
    living, not even to any ministers wheresoever they may be.

    ‘He will receive a special cypher for corresponding on this
    subject, under cover of addresses to be indicated to him by the
    Count de Broglio or the Sieur Tercier, and he will communicate
    to them, by means of this cypher, all the information he is
    able to obtain on the designs of England, as regards Russia and
    Poland, the North, and the whole of Germany, so far as will,
    in his opinion, conduce to the interests of my service, of his
    zeal and attachment to which I am sensible.’[107]

                                         ‘Versailles, June 3, 1763.’

De Praslin failed, as we have seen, to incriminate the Chevalier in a
correspondence with the exiled de Broglios, but it so happened that
shortly after receiving the duke’s report of his midnight interview
with D’Eon, on the subject of the battle of Villinghausen, de Pompadour
obtained certain information tending to confirm her suspicions, without,
however, affording sufficiently tangible evidence. Unsuccessful in
securing this, whichever way she directed the scrutiny of those at Court
too pliant to her will, her spirit of malevolence impelled her not to
stop short of anything in the attainment of her wishes.

    ‘The delightful discovery,’ says D’Eon, ‘was made by the
    fair Marquise de Pompadour, who, one evening in June 1763,
    relieved the pocket of her lover, as he lay fast asleep,
    of several papers, amongst which was a letter from me in
    cypher, deciphered, signed _Auguste_. To rid himself of the
    importunate questions of this second Maintenon, Louis XV.
    simply replied: “It is from a woman of letters who is of no
    importance in England, and who has my permission to give me
    special news.” This new Herodias—inquisitive, restless, jealous
    and piqued—with the aid of the enlightened Duke de Choiseul
    fixed her suspicions on me; and as she could not have my head
    brought by her daughter on a charger, had recourse to one of
    her worthless adulators,[108] who readily undertook to dispose
    of me by poison, and thus possess himself of all my letters as
    he would have the right to do, in the position of ambassador
    which he was about to occupy in London.’

[Sidenote: BETRAYED TO THE MARQUISE.]

D’Eon attributed de Pompadour’s attention being directed towards himself
to the action of an informer with whom he had long been acquainted. We
quote his own narrative:—

    ‘During the time that the negotiations in support of the
    pretensions of the Prince de Conti to the throne of Poland and
    to the hand of the Empress Elizabeth were being conducted, a
    secret correspondence had been organised between the King, the
    Prince, M. Tercier, the Count Woronzoff, the Chevalier Douglas,
    and myself. The Sieur Monin, private secretary to the Prince de
    Conti, was not only privy to it, but was also the most active
    agent at work with the Chevalier Douglas, in behalf of myself,
    and of M. Tercier who had unlimited confidence in him. M.
    Tercier, the most honest of men, and who fancied that everybody
    else was like himself, had concealed nothing from friend Monin.
    He had frequently shown him, in my presence, the various
    communications received from ambassadors and ministers, whether
    in Poland or in Russia. Unhappily, friend Monin had formerly
    been tutor to the Count de Guerchy, who had received from him
    his fine education, and in token of gratitude to the Prince de
    Conti, the Count de Guerchy turned this counsellor over to him.
    Monin, in his turn, wishing to testify to his own gratitude,
    considered it his duty to apprise the Count de Guerchy of
    what he knew concerning me, so soon as his pupil had become
    an ambassador and he himself was aware of the inquisition
    instituted by Madame de Pompadour. He declared to de Guerchy
    that I had been for a long time in secret correspondence with
    the King, and that he strongly suspected me of being a link
    in the mysterious chain which united the House of Broglio to
    the sovereign. Count de Guerchy lost no time in communicating
    his conjectures to his friend of thirty years’ standing, the
    Duke de Praslin, who passed them on to Madame de Pompadour.
    She resolved upon verifying them, and employed every effort
    to ascertain the truth; but neither the woman’s cunning, nor
    the caresses of the mistress, nor the stratagems of ministers,
    were able to wrench the secret from the King, and de Pompadour
    determined upon resorting to other measures. She had noticed
    that Louis XV. habitually carried about him the small golden
    key of an elegant piece of furniture, a sort of escritoire,
    in his private apartments. Never could the favourite succeed,
    even in moments of her greatest influence, in obtaining access
    to this piece of furniture. It was a kind of sanctuary,
    a holy ark, the refuge, as if a place of exile, of the
    sovereign’s wishes. Louis XV. no longer reigned except over
    this escritoire. He remained king of this article of furniture
    only; it was the sole portion of his states wherein he had not
    allowed the courtesan to trespass and defile; the only jewel
    of his crown he had not laid at her feet. “It contains State
    papers!” This was his reply to her frequent questions, his
    laconic and decisive refusal to all her solicitations. Now
    those were no other papers than the Count de Broglio’s and my
    own correspondence. The Marquise was mistrustful. Besides, it
    was enough that access to the escritoire should be forbidden
    to make her the more anxious to get at the inside of it. To
    her policy and hatred was united the feeling of curiosity;
    forbidden fruit has irresistible charms to a woman. This is
    a fact since the beginning of the world, and will be to the
    end.’[109]

[Sidenote: THE MARQUISE’S CURIOSITY SATISFIED.]

After relating de Pompadour’s act for satisfying her cupidity, the
Chevalier continues:—

    ‘From that day my ruin was resolved upon. I was pointed out to
    the Duke de Praslin and the Count de Guerchy as an enemy, and
    I should, no doubt, have incurred immediate disgrace if the
    favourite’s first object had not been to possess herself of
    the correspondence and papers in my possession. From that time
    were lavished upon me delusive attentions alternately with
    real vexations, the preludes of the enormities and villainies
    about to follow. The Count de Guerchy had been recommended to
    practise dissimulation until such time as he should be with me
    in England; but the inexperienced diplomatist was unable to
    restrain himself from being overbearing and insulting towards a
    man whom he considered as hopelessly lost. The secret confided
    to him showed itself through all the wretched vexations with
    which he annoyed me upon the slightest pretext, and I should
    have guessed it, had not M. Tercier spared me the trouble,
    in making the following revelation, under date of June 10:
    “The King sent for me this morning; I found him very pale and
    very agitated. He told me in an unusual tone of voice that he
    feared the secret of our correspondence had been violated.
    He related that having sat down to a _tête-à-tête_ supper
    with Madame de Pompadour a few days ago, he became drowsy
    after having slightly indulged, the Marquise, he thought, not
    being altogether innocent in the matter. She took advantage
    of his nap to relieve him of the key of a particular piece of
    furniture[110] which his Majesty keeps closed to everybody, and
    in this way made herself acquainted with your relations with
    the Count de Broglio. His Majesty suspects this from the state
    of confusion in which he has found his papers. I am accordingly
    commanded to require you to observe the greatest prudence
    and the greatest discretion in your intercourse with his
    ambassador, who is about to leave for London and who, he has
    reason to believe, is entirely devoted to the Duke de Praslin
    and Madame de Pompadour. His Majesty has also declared most
    positively that he should never have decided upon sending him
    to England if he had not entirely relied upon you.”’[111]

The Chevalier’s nomination as Resident at the Court of St. James’ was
succeeded by that, on May 31, of Mr. Neville, in succession to the Duke
of Bedford, as Resident and Chargé d’Affaires at the French Court, the
same rank with which D’Eon was invested, and with whom Neville was placed
in every respect on the same footing. D’Eon had been received by George
III., but when, in due course, Neville demanded an audience, he was
informed by the ‘Introducteur des Ambassadeurs’ that there never was an
instance of a resident having had an audience to present his credentials.
Neville pressed his rights until, finding it impossible to approach the
King, he reported the difficulty of his situation. De Praslin had in the
meantime given official intimation to the above effect to Lord Egremont
through D’Eon, and afterwards suggested as a means out of the dilemma
that Neville should be accredited minister plenipotentiary, the lowest
rank that could be received at the French Court. Lord Egremont quickly
reminded the French ministers that since a resident could not be received
in audience at the Court of France, they should have better considered
their action when making such an appointment. The error was theirs, and
it was for them to rectify it by being the first to appoint a minister
plenipotentiary, in which case England could reciprocate. An active
interchange of letters between the two ministers, from June 13 to July
22, resulted to the great advantage of D’Eon, who received new credential
letters giving him the character of minister plenipotentiary, in which
quality he was again presented to the King of England; after which, other
credentials were furnished to Neville, then for the first time received
by his Most Catholic Majesty.[112]

[Sidenote: A FAVOURITE IN ENGLISH SOCIETY.]

We have reached that period of D’Eon’s life—he was but in his
thirty-fifth year—when he had become minister plenipotentiary from France
at the Court of Great Britain; he had obtained the coveted knighthood
of Saint Louis; he was the secret correspondent of Louis XV., and the
secret agent of his Majesty and of the Count de Broglio in the drafting
of plans for the invasion of England. Numerous congratulations poured
in upon him, among them being those of Count Woronzoff and the Marquis
de l’Hôpital, his fellow-workers in Russia. How he took his promotion
appears in the following letter—a free and outspoken denunciation of what
he felt might be in store for him—to the man he most esteemed and loved.

    _D’Eon to the Count de Broglio._

    ‘Providence rewards me above my merits; it is useless for
    me to shut out fortune; she razes walls to get at me. When
    I say fortune, I do not mean wealth, for you know that our
    minister is more than economical; but by fortune I mean
    honour, preferment. You are aware of my latest promotion in
    the diplomatic service, for which I neither sought nor asked.
    A fortuitous chance gave birth to it, another chance will
    destroy it. I will be none the less the slave of events. You
    will take notice that I frankly speak the truth when necessary,
    and whether it be found good or bad, I will go on my own way,
    and it is quite immaterial to me whether I be retained or sent
    about my business. I look upon fortune as my waiting-woman, and
    on truth as my mistress, and it will ever make me sick at heart
    to have to do my duty under certain chiefs; you understand
    me. They would turn the course of events to their own special
    advantage, or to their private views; it is precisely in this
    that lies what is revolting to my sense of truth, and many take
    for pride what is but integrity of heart and purpose.’[113]

The Chevalier was greatly liked in English society, and had become a
favourite of good George III. We find him included by Horace Walpole
amongst the distinguished guests at the Strawberry Hill breakfast
given to Madame de Boufflers, and his countrymen were proud of their
representative; but a storm was gathering which was about to engulf him,
and turn the tide of his fortunes, so brilliant at the outset, in a
completely different direction.

The Count de Broglio’s apprehensions for the safety of de la Rosière’s
reports and other private papers of the King, increased as the time of
de Guerchy’s departure for England drew nigh. In his restless anxiety,
he instructed D’Eon to remove himself and every private document in
his charge from the French Embassy, before the ambassador made his
appearance, to apartments where they should be absolutely beyond his
interference and reach. Any excuse would do to account for his change
of residence, and he was recommended to take to live with him either
of his kinsmen, D’Eon de Mouloise or Carlet de la Rosière, who would
be valuable protection against any attempt at a surprise, and trusty
substitutes in the event of any unforeseen accident to himself; in fact,
every precaution was to be taken to prevent the secret correspondence
from falling into the hands of strangers, and especially of the King’s
ambassador and ministers. In a few days the precious documents were
securely deposited in a house in Dover Street, to which D’Eon removed
immediately upon the arrival of the Count de Guerchy.

So thoroughly was the secret maintained that after four months even the
late ambassador, the Duke de Nivernois, who was on the most intimate
and friendly terms with all at Court, expressed his surprise at D’Eon’s
having quitted the Embassy. ‘Why do you always wish to live by yourself
and remain in loneliness?’ he wrote; ‘how can you live separated from
your work, and where can your work be, but under the ambassador’s roof?’
The Chevalier quotes Psalm cii. 7, and adds cynically: ‘I prefer the
solitude of my little library to the society of the great. Men are not
good for much. Knaves or fools; so much for three-fourths of them; as
for the other fourth, they stay at home.’

[Sidenote: D’EON’S FALL DECREED.]

The Marquise de Pompadour had condemned the Chevalier D’Eon for acts
he had not committed—he had not betrayed his connection with the de
Broglios, he refused to betray the King his master—both ever existing
grievances in her mind, and she decreed his fall and disgrace. Men
willing to stoop to do her will, and sufficiently powerful to carry it
out, were not wanting at Versailles. With such as the Duke de Praslin,
the Count d’Argental, and the Count de Guerchy, pretexts could never
fail, and the Chevalier’s epistolary dissensions with de Praslin on
certain monetary claims against the State, which he honestly persisted
in making, as also his just resentment of de Guerchy’s censures on what
the latter considered excessive outlay at his expense, during the term of
D’Eon’s office as French representative in London, readily made up the
sum of heavy charges wherewith to crush him. We would avoid anticipating
events, but let us say here, that designs even on the life of the
minister plenipotentiary were contemplated by two, at the least, of the
triumvirate which had bound itself to wreck him.[114]

When D’Eon was first sent on secret service to Russia, he had to contract
a loan of ten thousand livres on his own account to meet his expenses.
Ordered by M. Rouillé, Minister for Foreign Affairs, when despatched
to Russia for the second time officially, to remain with the Chevalier
Douglas until the arrival of the ambassador, Douglas considered it
desirable, in view of the coming changes, that D’Eon’s application for
reimbursement should not be made except to his own Court, feeling
persuaded that sooner or later his claim would be acknowledged by the
latter. Acquiescing in this, D’Eon deferred pressing for money, and
contented himself by zealously carrying out what he knew to be the wishes
of M. Rouillé, who had frequently and authoritatively promised him
promotion and rewards, should the mission upon which he was employed turn
out a success; but upon his return to France that minister was no longer
in office, and when he solicited the Cardinal de Bernis and the Duke de
Choiseul for a settlement, was met by each with the reply, ‘You should
have obtained payment of my predecessor.’

[Sidenote: CREDITORS KEPT AT BAY.]

From the time that de Praslin, as Count de Choiseul, had succeeded his
cousin, the Duke de Choiseul, in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
D’Eon took frequent occasion to remind him of his entangled situation,
arising from having to pay interest on the original loan of ten thousand
livres expended in the interests of the Crown. His debt had increased
to fifteen thousand livres, and he found himself seriously compromised
and threatened by his creditors, with no prospect whatever, considering
his own limited resources, of being able to satisfy their just demands.
Having settled his small property on his mother, he was entirely
dependent on his own exertions, and, notwithstanding the estimation in
which his services were held, he had always been kept a poor man. His
salary as secretary of Embassy in Russia never exceeded three thousand
livres, and even that was reduced to one thousand crowns upon the Duke
de Choiseul assuming office. When on leave of absence from his regiment,
awaiting orders to proceed to St. Petersburg, his pay was stopped; and
as secretary of Embassy in London he was in receipt of three thousand
livres only. ‘Three thousand livres a year,’ wrote de Nivernois to de
Praslin, when pressing the Chevalier’s claims to greater consideration,
‘does not go so far in London as would fifteen thousand livres in
Paris. These are but the wages of an ordinary clerk ... his salary
should be more in accordance with the style of living in England, where
everything is singularly expensive.’ De Praslin was not to be moved,
and yet what stronger proof was needed of his sense of the wrongs under
which D’Eon was suffering, and of the recognised serious nature of his
embarrassments, than is to be found in the singular document supplied to
him as protection in France against arrest and detention, at a moment
when he was required to proceed to Versailles, with the ratifications to
the Treaty of Peace.

    _LETTER OF STATE, in favour of the Sieur D’Eon de Beaumont._

    ‘LOUIS, by the grace of God, King of France and of Navarre, to
    our well-beloved and trusty Councillors, the bodies holding our
    Courts of Parliament, the Grand Council, the Court of Aids,
    ordinary Requests of our House and of our Palaces, Bailiffs,
    Seneschals, Prevosts, Judges, their Lieutenants, and all other
    our Officers and Justiciaries whom it may concern, Greeting.
    Our dear and well-beloved Charles, Geneviève, Louis, Auguste,
    André, Timothée D’Eon de Beaumont, captain in the regiment
    of the d’Autichamp dragoons, Censor Royal, and Secretary of
    our Embassy in England, being at present in London in the
    performance of the functions of his office, and unable, in
    consequence, to attend to his own private affairs: We desire
    and command by these presents, signed with our hand, that all
    and each of the actions at civil law instituted, or about to
    be instituted before you, in which he shall appear, whether
    as plaintiff or as defendant, shall be holden by you, as they
    are holden by Us, in their present state and in suspension for
    the space of six months, during which time We very expressly
    forbid you to have any knowledge thereon, or that you take
    any proceedings thereon, under pain of nullity, annulment
    of procedure and of all expenses, damages, indemnities, and
    interests. We also desire and require that all processes
    moved, or about to be moved, in our Council concerning his
    civil interests, be and remain in suspension for the said
    term, during which we also forbid his accusers, under the said
    penalties, to take any proceedings; nevertheless, it is not our
    intention to derogate in the least degree, by these presents,
    from the declaration of the twenty-third December, one thousand
    seven hundred and two, containing general instructions as to
    Letters of State, and which we require to be observed and
    executed according to their form and tenour. We command our
    principal usher or sergeant, upon being required, to issue in
    execution of these presents all summonses, notification, and
    other requisite and necessary acts without asking further leave
    or permission. For such is our pleasure. Given at Versailles,
    the twenty-second February, in the year of grace one thousand
    seven hundred and sixty-three, and the forty-eighth of our
    reign.

                                                            ‘LOUIS.’

    ‘In the King’s name.

                                        ‘CHOISEUL, DUKE DE PRASLIN.’

[Sidenote: A ‘CHURLISH’ LETTER.]

Pursued and worried by his creditors at home and abroad, and in despair
at the extremities to which he was being reduced, the Chevalier lost all
control over himself in his communications with the Foreign Minister,
who, he considered, had failed to keep his word.

    ‘You were good enough to hold out hopes of payment being made
    to me, when I was leaving for Paris with the ratifications to
    the Treaty of Peace. I have been paying interest for nearly
    nine years, on the money I borrowed to enable me to serve the
    King in the extreme north, when nobody dared to go there....
    The appointment of Minister Plenipotentiary, for which I never
    asked, has certainly not turned my head, thanks to a little
    philosophy; it has only involved me in heavier expenses....
    If the affairs of the King are in a bad state, mine are going
    from bad to worse.... Soon I shall complete ten years’ service
    as a diplomatist, without having become richer or sharper....
    I have incurred debts to the amount of 20,000 livres for
    having dabbled in politics.... I entreat you to decide upon
    my present and future prospects, and upon the favours I am to
    expect from your sense of justice; otherwise, I admit to you
    frankly, Monsieur le Duc, it will be impossible to carry on
    the war at my expense, during a time of peace.... If you are
    not good enough to think of me, I will die of consumption[115]
    instead of dying of molten grease as was the case with ——. I do
    not ask to be fattened at the King’s expense; I only wish for
    sufficient flesh to keep body and soul together.’

A friendly note of reproof from his late chief, de Nivernois, for having
written so ‘churlish’ a letter to de Praslin, was met by D’Eon’s regret
that his ‘churlish’ letter had given cause for vexation. The truths he
exposed, and the integrity of his demands, were not intended to vex two
just and enlightened ministers.... He respectfully demanded justice of
a minister he respected ... he respected the minister’s economy that
refused to pay his debts, but he respected much more his justice that
should pay them. So soon as he received the money, he would become as
meek as a paschal lamb.

    ‘If you are curious to know,’ continued the Chevalier, ‘what is
    passing in this country, the accounts are too long to repeat
    here, see my letters to the Duke de Praslin, and if you can
    then say I am an idle fellow, I will ask nothing more of the
    minister. When one serves the King well, one should at least
    have the wherewithal to meet the little liabilities incurred in
    unbounded zeal for his service.’[116]

                                                    ‘D’EON,
                                                    ‘_Ne variatur_.’




CHAPTER VI.

    D’Eon charged with extravagance at the Embassy—Irritating
    correspondence—Influx of French visitors—Odious proposal
    to D’Eon—Is to return to subordinate duties on being
    superseded—His remonstrances—The Earl of Hertford—The Count
    de Guerchy’s arrival in England, and D’Eon’s letters of
    recall—Secret despatch from Louis XV.—Official recall on the
    plea of mental alienation—Disregard of the ministerial orders.


[Sidenote: IRRITATING CORRESPONDENCE.]

Simultaneously with the griefs that were being so vigorously laid
before de Praslin, the Chevalier was indulging in a brisk interchange
of letters with de Guerchy, in which he vindicated himself with no
little dexterity against the charges of wanton extravagance as host at
the embassy in London, for the general maintenance of which the count
was solely responsible, the liberal allowance of a minister at one of
the first Courts in Europe being enjoyed by him, though only ambassador
_in petto_, and not by the minister plenipotentiary _in situ_. The
spirit of satire and sarcasm in which D’Eon had latterly indited his
letters to both those ministers was more than either could bear with;
but, forgetting their dignity in the face of what, after all, was gross
insubordination, they gave way to a feeling of resentment, the former
in admonitions and threats, after receipt of the ‘churlish’ note; the
latter, by being offensive and insulting, and persisting in peevish
and unbecoming lamentations on the frequent requisitions to which his
pocket was subjected. We cannot undertake to reproduce in full the
mutual recriminations, brimming with scorn, that brought to a close the
unseemly paper war which irrevocably sealed the fate of the Chevalier
D’Eon; but we must at least find room for a few of the ugly things that
were said by the strong, as well as by him who was on the defensive, and
whom they were deliberately luring to his destruction.

    _The Duke de Praslin to the Chevalier D’Eon._

                                         ‘Paris, September 17, 1763.

    ‘Sir,—I never could have believed that the title of Minister
    Plenipotentiary would cause you so quickly to forget the point
    whence you have started, and I had no reason to expect that
    your aspirations would increase in proportion as you received
    new favours.... I cannot conceive the necessity for the
    extraordinary outlay at the expense of the Count de Guerchy,
    and which is quite out of place. I do not conceal from you my
    displeasure at your having involved in so great expenditure one
    to whom I am attached, and in whom I take such an interest, and
    who trusted in you on my recommendation.... I hope that you
    will take better care of other people’s money for the future,
    and that you will endeavour to be as useful to him as you have
    been to the Duke de Nivernois, &c. &c.’

This and much more was irritating matter enough, and might perhaps have
been borne with patience by the Chevalier; but one other paragraph there
was which placidly gave him the lie, and banished all hopes of relief
out of his financial difficulties, so long as de Praslin remained at the
Foreign Ministry.

    ‘I gave you no reason to expect the reimbursement of your
    former journey to Russia, because three of my predecessors upon
    whom you made a similar demand had not, it appeared, found it
    legitimate.’

[Sidenote: CLAIMS UPON THE STATE.]

It was not in D’Eon’s nature to receive this prevaricating statement with
composure. He was not sufficiently cool-headed to make a perfectly good
courtier. Smarting under insult and what he considered undeserved injury,
he relieved his agitated mind in emphatic language such as this:—

                                        ‘London, September 25, 1763.

    ‘I received, the day before yesterday, the private letter
    you did me the honour to write to me on the 17th inst.; I
    can only look upon it as a Testament _ab irato_.[117] _The
    point whence I started_, when very young, was my native town,
    Tonnerre, where I have a small property and a house fully
    six times larger than that occupied in London by the Duke de
    Nivernois. _The point whence I started_, in 1756, was the Hôtel
    d’Ons-en-Bray, Rue de Bourbon, Faubourg St. Germain. I am the
    friend of the owner of that mansion, and I left him, against
    his will, to make three journeys to Russia and to other Courts
    in Europe, to join the army, to come to England, to bring four
    or five treaties to Versailles, not as a courier, but as a man
    who had contributed to the framing of them. I have frequently
    travelled although sick to death, and upon one occasion with a
    broken leg; nevertheless, I am prepared to return to _the point
    whence I started_, if such be my fate. I can only certify, as
    a geometrician, that all points proceed from and should meet
    in a common centre. _The points whence I started_ are those of
    being a gentleman, a soldier, and a secretary of embassy; all
    so many _points_ which naturally lead to becoming a minister at
    foreign courts. The first gives a claim, the second strengthens
    consciousness and endues with the necessary firmness for such
    a post, but the third is the school for it. I acquitted myself
    so creditably in the latter, according to your own judgment,
    Monsieur le Duc, as to merit reward.... But whatever may have
    been _the point whence I started_, the King, my master, having
    chosen me to represent him, I should have forgotten everything,
    and kept in sight only the _point_ I have reached. This is my
    rule of right, and you will remind me of it if I forget it....
    I venture to assure you, that you were good enough to promise
    that you would again inquire into the matter of my first
    journey to Russia, and that you should do me justice.... At
    Vienna you told me that were you minister I should very soon
    be paid ... you repeated your promise the last time I had the
    honour of dining with you at Versailles ... the Duchess was
    present.... I reminded you that I had been paying interest for
    nearly nine[118] years on 10,000 livres borrowed for my first
    Muscovite journey. The Duchess’ heart was touched, and she said
    to you: “Really you should see that poor M. D’Eon, who has
    served his King so well, is paid.” You, also, were touched,
    and kindly replied: “I will make inquiries. I should be very
    glad to see that he is paid, but how is it to be done!” That
    same evening I left for England, and have remained crushed ever
    since under the burden of my debts.... It is no proof that my
    claims are groundless, because your predecessors failed to
    do me justice. They succeeded each other in office with such
    rapidity, as rarely to have had time to inquire into the many
    matters on hand, and it is precisely because they failed in
    their justice towards me, that I seek it at your hands....
    Whether you be pleased or displeased, Monsieur le Duc, I will
    respectfully continue to appeal to your sense of justice ...
    and I will not cease to serve the King with my wonted zeal....
    I respect your economy which is not disposed to pay my debts,
    but I have greater regard for your justice, which should pay
    them ... for mercy’s sake let me be paid my first expenses to
    Russia, that I may satisfy my creditors ...;’ then, defending
    himself against the charge of extravagance, he says: ‘Life and
    style of living in Paris is very different to what both are in
    London ... my accounts should be seen and examined.... I defy
    any housekeeper to find in my accounts a single item of useless
    expenditure of fifteen or twenty guineas throughout.... I have
    never been at the head of any house except that of my father,
    and in a twelvemonth it came to grief.... If you desire to know
    me, Monsieur le Duc, I tell you frankly that I am of use only
    for thinking, imagining, questioning, reflecting, comparing,
    reading, writing, or to run from east to west, from north to
    south, to fight on hill and dale. Had I lived in the time of
    Alexander or of Don Quixote, I should certainly have been
    Parmenion or Sancho Panza. If you remove me out of my element,
    I will squander the entire revenue of France in the course of a
    twelvemonth without committing a single folly, and afterwards
    present you with an able treatise on economy....’

One extract, I think, suffices as an illustration of the general
character of de Guerchy’s letters to D’Eon:—

                                           ‘Jouy, September 4, 1763.

    ‘... The Duke de Nivernois informs me that he has lately
    written to you on the subject of your communication, having
    reference to the position to which chance has called you, and
    to your wishes therewith so soon as I shall have arrived in
    London.... I have shown the accounts you have sent to the Duke
    de Praslin ... we find the expenditure excessive, the half of
    my emoluments having been consumed ... nobody here expects
    you to keep up any state.... I do not approve of the numerous
    gratuities with which I am charged, and do not hold myself
    responsible for them....’

[Sidenote: PLENIPOTENTIARY _v._ AMBASSADOR.]

    _D’Eon’s Reply._

                                        ‘London, September 25, 1763.

    ‘... I take the liberty of observing to you on the subject of
    _the position to which chance has called me_, that Solomon said
    a long time ago—everything here below was chance, opportunity,
    good luck, happiness, and misfortune, and that I am more than
    ever persuaded Solomon was a great preacher. I will modestly
    add that _the chance_ which gave the title of minister
    plenipotentiary to a man who has negotiated successfully
    during the past ten years, was in probability not one of the
    most mistaken. What has come to me by _chance_ might come to
    another by _good luck_. He who becomes a minister or ambassador
    by _chance_ can never countenance arrangements repugnant to
    himself, without giving but a poor idea of his heart and
    mind.... I am sorry that the expenditure should seem heavy,
    but it has been indispensable.... I appeal to ample written
    testimony to this effect ... there is a large staff here to
    be paid and boarded at the expense of the coming ambassador
    ... the _chance_ which created me a minister should have been
    at the same time charitable enough to guarantee to me some
    kind of condition, because a minister who keeps no state is a
    being that has never existed.... I have been obliged to assume
    to myself certain state, just as all bodies take position
    according to respective gravitation. Not feeling the least
    remorse, I must be proof against reproach.... A man, no matter
    who, can only form an estimate of himself, even so far as his
    opinion goes, by comparing himself to one or more other men.
    There are several proverbs which serve to prove the truth of
    this. It is commonly said: _He is as stupid as any thousand—he
    is as wicked as any four—he is as shabby as any ten—men._ This
    is the only scale by which we can be guided, except in certain
    cases where men measure themselves by women. An ambassador,
    no matter who, may be worth half a man, a whole man, twenty,
    a thousand, or ten thousand men. It is necessary to determine
    how a minister plenipotentiary, who is a captain of dragoons,
    and has completed ten political campaigns (without counting
    campaigns in the field), stands relatively to an ambassador who
    is a lieutenant-general, and is making his début. Admitting
    proportions to be one to ten, the assessment would always be in
    favour of the minister plenipotentiary, papers being at hand,
    C.Q.F.D. Everybody will understand that domestics, horses, and
    secretaries have consumed and continue to consume the same
    amount of food under the management of the Plenipotentiary
    D’Eon as under that of the Duke de Nivernois. They have
    remained ever since under the same sky and with an equally good
    appetite.... There are occasions upon which gratuities must be
    distributed.... I had to do so on delivering my credentials,
    first as resident, then as minister plenipotentiary—on the
    King’s birthday, the day the Queen gave birth to Prince
    Frederick, and on the anniversary of the King’s coronation.
    You must give people something, otherwise they refuse to leave
    the door, make an abominable row, and end with obscene dances.
    Happily, I am a bachelor; but you will have to see to this when
    you arrive....’

In another letter to de Guerchy, the Chevalier writes:—

    ‘I dined with Lord Hertford to-day and met the diplomatic
    corps, Lords Sandwich and March, and several other
    noblemen.... Yesterday, the day of St. Louis, Lords Hertford
    and March did me the honour to call at the embassy with several
    illustrious Scotsmen, amongst them David Hume, who will ever
    be the ornament and glory of his country. Some members of the
    diplomatic corps had thought proper to tell me that they would
    call at the French Embassy to celebrate the day of St. Louis. I
    did not invite, I did not refuse to receive them, and I gave no
    extraordinary reception. If the minister finds fault with this,
    I am not to blame.... I could not have acted otherwise.’

Unyielding as the Duke de Broglie shows himself to be in his general
condemnation of D’Eon, we find him admitting[119] that French persons
of distinction abounded in London during several months after the
re-establishment of peace, all eager to visit the country so little known
and until then so little understood, and whose customs and literature
had only just been brought into fashion by Voltaire and Montesquieu. It
became the rage, as sometimes happens with society in Paris; and the idea
that they were rendering homage to conquerors did not restrain any of the
generation of that day, more interested in political and philosophical
innovations than in national honour. The Countess de Boufflers[120] had
given the signal, arriving with a number of literary people in her train.

    ‘I was obliged,’ again wrote D’Eon, ‘to acquit myself of my
    duty to the Countess de Boufflers, a thousand times more of a
    philosopher and more learned than I am, and quite a match for
    any academician; as well as to other persons of quality in
    London, without including Duclos, de la Condamine, Le Camus,
    Lalande, &c.’

[Sidenote: AN ODIOUS PROPOSAL.]

Mistrustful, too, of the Chevalier’s veracity, the Duke de Broglie
informs his readers that until he had seen the original letter to de
Guerchy, dated September 25, in the official archives, he could not
believe in the authenticity of the copy published by D’Eon himself in
his ‘Lettres, Mémoires et Négotiations Particulières,’ the work to which
we are frequently having recourse. The duke’s, and our own readers, will
perhaps feel inclined to sympathise with his grace’s amazement at D’Eon’s
audacity in holding such language towards his superiors, until they learn
the vantage afforded by a vitiated and unscrupulous minister, when he
again insulted the Chevalier by seeking his co-operation in an odious and
dishonourable transaction. De Guerchy’s complaints of the Chevalier’s
extravagance as his _locum tenens_ became so loud and frequent that an
idea—a most foul idea—was conceived by de Praslin for making good the
supposed losses sustained by his old friend. Incredible as it appeared
at the time, de Nivernois lent something more than his countenance in
support, for it was he who first proposed it to D’Eon. His letter bore
three dates, September 9, 10 and 11, which the Chevalier interpreted by
saying that the late ambassador’s hand had refused its office twice,
even his ink-horn had shrunk from him, until at last his noble heart had
humbled itself to please old friends—the minister and ambassador.

    ‘... Give me leave to tell you, my dear friend,’ wrote de
    Nivernois after a three days’ struggle with his conscience,
    ‘that you are wrong in dissipating nearly one-half of M. de
    Guerchy’s monthly allowances. But it is not enough to find
    fault, we must appeal to facts and find a remedy.... I think
    that a gratuity, be it in your name or in that of M. de
    Guerchy, but in either case for his benefit, will serve to fill
    up the gap made by your dinners, and nothing more will be said
    on the matter....’ ‘There are remedies that are worse than
    the disease,’ was the Chevalier’s reply, also of September
    25: ‘Are not those you propose, Monsieur le Duc, of this
    kind? ... _application to be made to the King for a gratuity
    in my behalf, but which is to be for the benefit of another
    man’s pocket_! I could not conscientiously agree to such an
    expedient, unless I were furnished with a duly legalised
    receipt; for I am a man of order, and think it preferable to
    leave open the gap made by my dinners rather than to stop it
    up with such a plug.... I will never consent to the King being
    asked for a gratuity in my name for the benefit of another....’

So far as the Chevalier was personally concerned, he felt that all he had
to reproach in the Duke de Nivernois was the Italian shrewdness of his
great-uncle the Cardinal Mazarin, and the extreme weakness and tenderness
of his poor nerves and understanding. He thought the duke must have
been endowed to a marvellous extent with a natural fund of honesty, for
it was a wonderful fact that, although he had been the friend of three
illustrious rascals during the past thirty years, the purity of his soul
had never become contaminated by so long and so close a friendship, by
so foul and unnatural an alliance. The astounding virtue of the amiable
duke reminded him of that of St. Ives. _Sanctus Ivo erat advocatus et non
latro. O res miranda!_[121]

One other mortification, the climax to the persecution he was undergoing,
the Chevalier was about to endure, and when we shall have become
acquainted with it, there will no longer be room for surprise at the bold
and unflinching attitude he had been assuming, and at the factious spirit
in which he had been addressing his superiors.

[Sidenote: DISCOURAGING INTELLIGENCE.]

When the Chevalier’s credentials as Resident reached England, de
Nivernois, perceiving that his _protégé’s_ mission was to end with the
appearance of a new ambassador, took occasion to express himself in
unmistakable terms to de Praslin on the unfairness of the arrangement,
and urged, considering the past valuable services of his secretary and
the conditions upon which he had accepted his appointment the preceding
autumn, that promotion, to which he was fully entitled, should be
permanent. Never ceasing to concern himself in all that related to ‘his
little D’Eon,’ de Nivernois, although no longer ambassador, continued
his exertions long after returning to France, with the success only of
receiving intimation from the minister that the Chevalier was shortly
to become minister plenipotentiary, when he should have to abandon his
old claim to travelling expenses in Russia; but that upon de Guerchy’s
arrival he must return to his duties as secretary of Embassy. Whatever
the occasion, however, of the ambassador’s absence from his post in
the future, D’Eon should be left in charge with the temporary rank of
resident; and this was all he could expect. Feeling how unpalatable
such news would be, de Nivernois earnestly recommended the Chevalier to
accept the situation and hope for better days. It was true that in again
becoming secretary after having been minister plenipotentiary, he was
descending from a bishopric to become a miller, but millers who had been
bishops were not to be found by the dozen! He warned him against further
disposition to rebel, repeating what he had already said more than once:
‘I know the man with whom you will have to deal’—an opinion of de Guerchy
much of the same substance as that expressed by the Count de Broglio.

It was very singular, thought the Chevalier, that when engaged in
war he was at peace with everybody, but since he had toiled at the
re-establishment of peace, he seemed to be at war with everybody.

    _The Chevalier D’Eon to the Duke de Nivernois._

                                                    ‘August 1, 1763.

    ‘... This is a difficult and an impossible negotiation, and
    when I had the honour to tell you that I considered the
    rank of Minister Plenipotentiary to be a misfortune, rather
    than a benefit, I was right. I never sought the title nor
    did I wish for it. It was bestowed upon me, and having been
    obliged to assume it, I cannot again become a secretary,
    then minister, again secretary, and so on.... I should be
    a general laughing-stock, and no longer in a position to
    serve the King usefully.... Should my letters of recall not
    be sent, and I am permitted to retain my title, without,
    however, discharging the office except at certain intervals,
    I shall remain and cheerfully do my duty under the Count de
    Guerchy’s orders, and the Duke de Praslin may allot any such
    salary as he thinks proper. _I am tractable as regards money,
    but intractable on points of honour._ ... I have made every
    effort to please you, the Duke de Praslin and the Count de
    Guerchy, and after mature reflection and having well weighed
    every circumstance, I cannot but be persuaded that what is
    demanded of me is an impossibility and not in my power to agree
    to, without compromising the dignity of the King, a matter
    of great moment to me, and without compromising the title of
    Minister Plenipotentiary.... I shall certainly serve the Count
    de Guerchy with zeal and attachment equal to that I entertain
    towards the Duke de Nivernois, because when I serve, I do not
    say with the priests, _ad utilitatem quoque nostram_. I serve
    solely for honour and for the greater glory of the King....
    My heart is deeply touched at the trouble you have been kind
    enough to take, and at the advice you give ... your counsels
    may be useful at Versailles, but suffer me to say that they
    will not do in London.’

D’Eon further informed the duke that his loins were not sufficiently
supple to enable him to vault politically, at one time on the mule of a
bishop, at another on the ass of a miller!

[Sidenote: AN UNENVIABLE SITUATION.]

Without seeking to justify the Chevalier’s conduct in addressing such
flippant letters to his superiors, even to those he loved so well, some
indulgence may be claimed under provocation of no ordinary character. His
pension, ever in arrear, was irregularly paid; his salary as resident
was fixed at the inadequate sum of 12,000 livres, and he was to live at
the charge of the ambassador, whose pocket, by desire of de Praslin and
de Nivernois, should be spared to the utmost, and for whose sole benefit
a gratuity was to be obtained from the King, by a fraud in which it was
expected he would connive. It was too true that de Guerchy was totally
unfitted for the high office he had been called upon to fill, but ‘little
D’Eon, experienced, zealous, and useful,’ would be retained to do the
work, and steer the count clear of all eventual troubles; not, however,
with the title of minister or resident, to which he had been raised, but
as secretary of Embassy, to which he would have to descend, resuming the
former rank at such times only as the ambassador might be absent from his
post. ‘Little D’Eon, an easy, good-natured fellow,’ would have peaceably
resigned himself almost to any arrangement in accordance with the
pleasure of ministers; but the prospect of degradation to secretary, at
the same Court at which he had become plenipotentiary, was more than his
proud spirit could bear. This was the open wound that never healed.... He
had been directed by the King to receive his instructions from Tercier as
if they came from himself; he accordingly wrote to Tercier for guidance,
received expressions of sympathy and confessions of indignation,
and being supported by further secret orders from his sovereign, he
determined on his course of action.

For several months past an ambassador to France had been talked about,
and so early as April 14, D’Eon had intimated to de Guerchy that it
was commonly believed Lord Hertford would be named, accompanying the
information, as was his custom, with a sketch of that nobleman. The earl
was a Knight of the Garter, the father of six sons and six daughters all
living, without counting those to come, for her ladyship was still young
and in an interesting condition. His lordship spoke French well, and
was just the man to preserve the peace so happily arranged between the
two nations. He was a very courteous and amiable man, and of the same
illustrious family as the beautiful Seymour, one of the empty-headed
wives of a heartless king—he alluded to Henry VIII.[122]

The official notification of the Earl of Hertford’s appointment,
September 29, as ambassador to the Court of France, was quickly followed
by the official nomination, October 3, of the Count de Guerchy. Speaking
of the new minister, George III. asked the French plenipotentiary if he
was a good officer as general of infantry, to which D’Eon replied that he
was so good as never to have harmed anybody, and although a general of
infantry he considered him better qualified to command cavalry, because
at the battle of Minden he recommended the cavalry to be placed in the
centre and infantry on the wings. De Guerchy arrived in London on October
17, and put up at Lord Holland’s. The Chevalier hastened to wait upon his
new chief, and the two men stood face to face, not for the first time
in their lives, de Guerchy at once betraying the spirit by which he was
animated, in expressing his surprise at D’Eon not being present when he
alighted from his coach, and then asking whether he did not regret having
written to him his letter of September 25. ‘No, sir, and were you to
write me such another letter as that of September 4, from Jouy, I should
be obliged to send you a similar reply.’ De Guerchy added that he should
preserve the original as long as he lived; to which D’Eon replied that
if he feared to lose it he begged to offer copies in quadruplicate, with
his own attestation _ne variatur_! And so ended the first interview in
England between these two men, whose malignant hatred of each other was
not even swallowed up in death.

[Sidenote: LETTERS OF RECALL.]

In the course of the evening, de Guerchy informed D’Eon that he had
brought his letters of recall. ‘A la bonheur (_sic_), Monsieur le Comte!’
said the latter. ‘I will call for them in the morning, and at the same
time hand over all papers likely to be of consequence to you.’ The
following day, after de Guerchy had received the Embassy archives and
assumed official charge, the Chevalier demanded his letters of recall.
The ambassador, strangely agitated, searched drawers, portfolios, and
elsewhere, and finding them at last in his pocket, gave them to D’Eon,
at whose quiet acceptance of them he seemed disconcerted. D’Eon believed
that the pretended search was to give him time to make some kind of
apology for the past.

    _The Duke de Praslin to the Chevalier D’Eon._

                                       ‘Versailles, October 4, 1763.

    ‘Sir,—The arrival of the King’s ambassador putting an end to
    the commission entrusted to you by his Majesty as his Minister
    Plenipotentiary, I send to you your letters of recall, which
    you will deliver to his Britannic Majesty according to custom,
    and with the least possible delay. You will herewith find a
    copy of that letter. You will quit London immediately after
    your audience, and you will at once proceed to Paris, whence
    you will report your arrival, and where you will await my
    instructions without coming to Court.’[123]

The Chevalier was recalled, and yet expressly forbidden to appear
at Court! There was apprehension lest he should bring to light the
iniquities of which he was the victim! He was greatly moved at the
contents of this letter, for even the despatch he had received some days
previously, through the hands of a secret courier, had scarcely prepared
him for so overwhelming a blow.

    _To the Chevalier D’Eon, my Minister Plenipotentiary, London._

                                       ‘Versailles, October 4, 1763.

    ‘You have served me as usefully in the guise of a female as in
    the dress you now wear. Reassume it immediately, and withdraw
    into the city. I warn you that the King has this day signed,
    not with his hand, but with the stamp, the order to compel you
    to return to France; but I command you to remain in England,
    with all your papers, until such time as you receive further
    instructions from me. You are not in safety at your residence,
    and here you will find powerful enemies.[124]

                                                            ‘LOUIS.’

‘I have frequently heard the Chevalier D’Eon repeat to my father,’ says
Madame Campan, ‘the contents of this letter, in which Louis XV. thus
separated his individuality from the person of the King of France. The
Chevalier or Chevalière had kept all the King’s letters ...’[125] yet the
Duke de Broglie refuses to acknowledge its authenticity, and labours to
prove that it is an imposture.[126]

[Sidenote: FORSAKEN?]

No sooner had the Chevalier read de Praslin’s letter than it fell from
his hands. He began to suspect, for the first time, the evils that
menaced him. What was he to hope from the strength of character of a
monarch who deserted him when he had done nothing but obey his commands,
and whose only exhibition of courage consisted in signing away his
downfall with the stamp instead of with the sign-manual. Unable to adopt
and digest the idea that the King would submit himself to the will of
others, and sacrifice one who was dear to him and whom he supported in
secret, the Chevalier concluded that the affixing of a stamped signature
could only have been an act of momentary weakness, a concession to
temporary necessities, and he felt that he should be the more surely
justified, from having been so unjustly condemned. Reflections such
as these gave him courage and hope; he resumed his habitual gaiety,
his usual indifference, and resolved upon adhering to all the King’s
instructions, whatever the damaging situations in which they might place
him. He did not, however, resign himself to this sort of humiliation
without a struggle, being specially sensitive on points of honour and
self-esteem, feelings to which he was prone, and which were readily
excited within him.... He awaited his enemies with resignation, having
made up his mind to yield, step by step, inch by inch, and make them pay
dearly for a triumph he some day hoped to avenge.[127]

It had become de Praslin’s object to crush the Chevalier, first by
degrading him, then seizing his person, when he would have thrown him
in all probability into the Bastille. To effect this, he showed D’Eon’s
two letters of September 25 to the King—the one to himself, the other to
de Guerchy—and maintained that both sufficiently betrayed aberration of
wind in the plenipotentiary, who could not possibly continue at a foreign
court. It was under pressure such as this that Louis XV., feigning to
believe in the imputation, suffered the despatch of the letter of
recall, signed, not with his hand, but with the stamp.

    _Louis XV. to George III._

    ‘Sir, my Brother,—The arrival of the Count de Guerchy, my
    ambassador at your Court, causing the functions of my Minister
    Plenipotentiary to cease, I do not delay to divest him of his
    office, and to require his immediate presence in France; but as
    he is not in a condition to present his letters of recall, in
    person, I instruct the Count de Guerchy to deliver them to you,
    and to renew to you upon this occasion the assurances of the
    inviolable friendship with which you have inspired me, and of
    my sincere desire to render it for ever durable.[128]

    ‘I am Sir, my Brother,

                          ‘Your good Brother,

                                                            ‘LOUIS.’

    ‘Fontainebleau, October 3, 1763.’

‘Instead of bringing the Chevalier to trial and proving his guilt, de
Praslin contented himself by causing forged letters of recall to be
presented to the King of England by the Count de Guerchy. There was
nothing in this to manifest the majesty of ministerial justice—it was the
feeble apology of a desperate cause.’[129]

[Sidenote: KING, MISTRESS, AND MINISTERS.]

It was enough for the Chevalier to have learnt from the King himself
that his letters of recall were not signed with the sign-manual; he felt
assured that his Majesty could not be prevailed upon to sign away, with
his own hand, his perdition, whilst want of firmness and feebleness
of character had precluded him from fairly interposing in the action
of his minister, and he refused to recognise the authenticity of the
document.[130]

    ‘My letters of recall in the form of disgrace,’ he wrote,
    ‘not having been preceded on the part of the Duke de Praslin
    by necessary investigation, inquiry, or complete knowledge of
    all circumstances, whence the decision may be imputed to his
    own free act and will, are manifestly obreptitious, void, and
    of no effect. A decision of so great gravity would never have
    prevailed if truth, in seeking to approach the throne, had
    not been checked by innumerable obstacles. To have the right
    to persecute, one should be in the right, and to be in the
    right, it is sufficient not to be in the wrong. Ministers,
    like priests, are never in the wrong, and especially when
    they are strong enough to prove that they are in the right.
    Pompadour, who imagined that Louis XV. was unable to think,
    without her permission—those great ministers at Versailles who
    fancied that the King could do nothing without them, would be
    greatly astonished were I to prove to them, as clearly as is
    the light of the sun, and in the King’s own handwriting, that
    he mistrusted them all as he would a band of robbers; that he
    avoided them as he would a body of spies; and wishing to enjoy
    a little domestic peace, he allowed them to go the way of their
    own follies, for which he would afterwards try to make amends
    secretly. He had a hundred times more esteem, friendship, and
    real confidence in the intelligence, wisdom, and probity of the
    Count de Broglio, and in the valiant qualities of his little
    D’Eon, than in the whole of his mistresses and ministers put
    together, the majority of whom he kept about him from the same
    force of habit, largeness of heart, and regal grandeur, which
    induced him to keep other strange animals in his menagerie.
    When, under a despotic monarch, ministers and other great
    people at Court are corrupt and of prejudiced minds, no other
    alternative is left to oppressed innocence than an appeal to
    the King and to God. Under a republic, it is possible to appeal
    to God, to the people and to the sword; this last appeal being
    frequently attended with success, when battalions are strong,
    well disciplined, and artillery is well served.’[131]

Had D’Eon gone on to state how injured innocence was to reach a despotic
monarch, his experience would have been of service to many, even in this
the last but one decade of the nineteenth century; for the absolutism of
his adored master, his Most Christian Majesty Louis XV., is not to be
compared to that of one Christian ruler of these our times, the Imperial
ruler, who, whatever the disposition of his heart, is condemned by
tradition and long custom to spend his days in lonely grandeur, invisible
and unapproachable to all but one or two dissembling and unfaithful
ministers, too often shunned by even his nearest relatives, and therefore
unjustly mistrusted and despised by his subjects of every class.




CHAPTER VII.

    D’Eon’s interview with the Earl of Halifax—Refuses to surrender
    the King’s papers to de Guerchy—Declines to take leave of
    the King of England—A scene at the French Embassy—Another at
    Lord Halifax’s residence—A third at D’Eon’s—Summoned by a
    magistrate—De Guerchy’s hostile measures—D’Eon is dangerously
    drugged at the table of the French ambassador—Designs against
    his liberty—Removes to Brewer Street, Golden Square—Childishly
    annoyed—His extradition demanded—Warned to that effect by Louis
    XV.


With his usual alacrity and wariness in anticipating difficulties, by
strengthening the position into which he sometimes fancied he was forced
by chance, the Chevalier took occasion to represent to Lord Halifax, at a
special interview for which he had asked, that he could not consider his
letters of recall as authentic. In the first place, they had been brought
by the Count de Guerchy, which was absolutely contrary to all precedent,
and in these letters he was styled, simply, Minister Plenipotentiary,
the titles of Knight of the Order of Saint Louis and Captain of Dragoons
being omitted, although they appeared in his credentials; and what was
of most importance, they were not signed with the King’s own hand. Lord
Halifax expressed surprise at these informalities, and said that any
English minister rash enough to make use of the King’s signature under
similar circumstances would be doing so at the risk of his head; the King
of England signed with his own hand all letters to foreign princes, and
all special instructions to his ministers. Such an expression of opinion
was exactly what the Chevalier wanted.[132]

The Embassy archives received by de Guerchy were contained in the
same four despatch-boxes in which they had been delivered to D’Eon by
de Nivernois, and consisted only of the official cypher and ordinary
correspondence; but on taking leave of Madame de Pompadour and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, de Guerchy had engaged to secure, not only
the Chevalier’s person, but every scrap of paper in his possession.
Failing to obtain them coaxingly, he imperiously demanded, in the many
angry altercations on the subject, that all the documents which had
passed into his hands during his term of office, should be immediately
and unconditionally given up! D’Eon quietly persisted in his refusal to
surrender all such other papers as he conceived he had a right to retain,
unless he received orders to the contrary _direct from the King_, and on
October 23 he furnished the ambassador with this decision in writing.

The nature of the papers they coveted was a mystery to de Pompadour, de
Praslin, and de Guerchy, except that it was believed they incriminated
D’Eon in a correspondence with the proscribed de Broglios. Such would
certainly have been the case, but they also included the detailed plans
for an invasion of England, contemplated, as we are aware, and being
completed during the few months that had transpired since the treaty of
peace had been signed.

Finding D’Eon intractable and resolute, de Guerchy was urgent in
requiring him to present his letters of recall and return to France
with the least possible delay; and meaning to hasten his departure, he
requested the Secretary of State to obtain an audience for the minister
plenipotentiary on the earliest day possible. The following communication
was the result:—

    ‘Lord Halifax presents his compliments to the Chevalier D’Eon,
    and has the honour to inform him that, in consequence of
    unforeseen pressure of business, it will be more convenient to
    the King to grant an audience to M. D’Eon to-morrow, Wednesday,
    than on Friday next.’

    ‘St. James’, October 25, 1763.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘This note is a sufficiently genuine proof,’ wrote D’Eon a few
    months later, ‘that my presence at this Court was a terrible
    burden on the shoulders of M. de Guerchy. We are in the
    month of February, 1764, and I have not yet had my audience
    for taking leave.... Judging by appearances, M. de Guerchy
    will show the example.... The English minister wrote to me
    on October 25, and on the 24th I had received from the Duke
    de Choiseul a letter of the 18th of the same month, that is
    to say, fourteen days later than the date of the pretended
    letter of recall, in which I received fresh assurances of the
    satisfaction, at Court, with the manner in which I performed
    my duties, and requiring me to continue my correspondence.
    On that same day, the 24th, I received another letter, dated
    October 15, that is to say, eleven days after the doubtful
    letter of recall, in which the Controller-General entrusted me,
    in the King’s name, with fresh work.... Lord Halifax’s note
    might have influenced me to comply with Guerchy’s wishes, had
    I not believed it to be my duty to remain inflexible to his
    entreaties.’[133]

[Sidenote: ‘AWAITING FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS.’]

D’Eon declined the Secretary of State’s invitation to take leave of
the King on the 26th, but he attended his Majesty’s levée on that day,
and a dinner party in the evening at Lord Halifax’s, where the company
included Mr. Grenville, the Prime Minister, Lord Sandwich, and others,
and several foreign representatives. Scarcely had he entered the room at
Lord Halifax’s, than de Guerchy, advancing rapidly towards him, asked
why he had not taken leave of the King at the appointed audience. The
Chevalier made his usual laconic reply: ‘Because I am awaiting further
instructions,’ which led to an agitated and unseemly disputation,
until D’Eon brought it to a close by addressing himself to the three
English ministers who happened to be conversing together. ‘The Count
de Guerchy forces me to the honour of declaring to your Excellencies,
that I do not take leave at any audience, because I am awaiting further
instructions,’ which little speech ‘de Guerchy confessed he was quite
unable to comprehend, being himself a novice in diplomatic matters.’ Lord
Halifax showing some inclination to take de Guerchy’s part, D’Eon drew
from his pocket the invitation to dinner he had received, and said to
his lordship: ‘Your Excellency has invited the minister plenipotentiary
to dinner; I entreat that it be not delayed. It is late, and personally,
I wish to avail myself peaceably of the honour you have done me. I do
not come here to excite a disturbance but to bring peace.’ For such bold
words as these, Lord Halifax, who as yet knew but little of D’Eon, was
scarcely prepared; but they sufficed to put him on his guard, as the
sequel will show, for he was beginning to discover that he had to do
with a somewhat strange, perhaps violent, and at any rate very singular
character.

There called at the French Embassy one day in August, a tall, lean
Frenchman, who announced himself as M. Treyssac de Vergy, a great friend
of the Duke de Praslin and the Count de Guerchy, and other French
ministers, and as having come to England to visit a country of which so
little was known. The Chevalier D’Eon received him politely, but reminded
him that it was customary to bring letters of introduction to a minister,
and hoped that he would make it his business to do so; to which de Vergy
replied that he did not consider such letters at all necessary from his
being on terms of great intimacy with the Count de Guerchy, whom he
had met at supper at the house of the Marquises de Villeroy, de Lirré,
&c., and who was sure to embrace him on both cheeks the next time they
met. He repeated his calls, still without producing any letters, until
the Chevalier gave him clearly to understand, in the presence of several
members of the Embassy, that he should have to refuse him admittance if
he again made his appearance without some kind of recommendation.

[Sidenote: A MYSTERIOUS VISITOR.]

On October 23 the Chevalier dined with de Guerchy, and in the course of
the evening M. de Vergy was announced. The Countess de Guerchy asked
D’Eon, aside, if he knew him. ‘No, Madame, but I have my suspicions
about him.’ ‘Hush! M. D’Eon; pray do not speak so loud.’ De Guerchy then
inquired of D’Eon if he was acquainted with de Vergy. ‘No, Monsieur le
Comte, and I have already informed him that he must bring letters of
recommendation.’ Then, turning to de Vergy, he said: ‘Here is the Count
de Guerchy who you know so well, and with whom you have supped at the
Marquise de Villeroy’s. I do not see that he flies to embrace you.’ An
awkward silence of some moments was broken by de Guerchy: ‘Monsieur
de Vergy, I do not know you at all, nor have I met you at supper at
the Marquise de Villeroy’s, although I have the honour of knowing that
lady, and have frequently supped at her house.’ Foolish de Guerchy! How
dearly this utterance cost him, so untrue was it. De Vergy fixed his
eyes steadily on the ambassador, made a profound obeisance, and said:
‘I beg your Excellency’s pardon, I thought I had the honour of being
acquainted with you.’ Then, turning to D’Eon: ‘I have heard it said that
you were a polite man; there never was a greater mistake. _You do not
know, M. D’Eon, the fate that awaits you in France._’ These last words he
repeated a second time. The Chevalier, who was a perfect stranger to de
Vergy’s business in England, took the latter by the arm. ‘My politeness
does not extend to lying in behalf of others. I do not give you the lie,
because you do not know what it is to tell the truth.... I have nothing
with which to reproach myself, and am by no means anxious as regards
my fate, in France or elsewhere.... Were we not in the presence of the
ambassador and of his lady, I should very soon prove to you that I am not
afraid of your threats.’ Other visitors being announced, the ambassador
authoritatively put an end to the altercation, and to D’Eon’s great
surprise, de Vergy was permitted to spend the evening in the general
company.

On the morning of the 26th, whilst the Chevalier was absent from home
attending the King’s levée, de Vergy called at his residence in Dover
Street, and being informed, in answer to his inquiries, that D’Eon was
always at home at nine o’clock, left word that he should call at that
hour the following day, fully expecting to find him in. D’Eon took in
the significance of this message, and in the evening, after dinner at
Lord Halifax’s, he privately related to his lordship the whole of the de
Vergy incidents, and the challenge openly left at his house that morning.
For once, the Chevalier neglected his measures of prudence. Lord Halifax
had scarcely time to forget the mild reproof D’Eon found the courage to
administer to him that evening, before being unconcernedly told of an
intended breach of the peace by one in whose own country duelling was
forbidden under pain of death.[134]

[Sidenote: THE GUARDS TURNED OUT.]

Lord Halifax thanked the plenipotentiary for the information he had
communicated, and shortly invited the French ambassador into another
room, where they remained closeted for some minutes, and on coming
out again the two joined Mr. Grenville and Lord Sandwich in close
conversation. Lord Halifax then asked the Chevalier to abandon his
intention of meeting de Vergy. ‘I have no intention of going in search of
de Vergy, but since he has appointed an hour to see me, I shall certainly
await him.’ ‘Well, then,’ said Lord Halifax, ‘were you even the Duke of
Bedford, I should have to give you in charge of the Guards.’ ‘I have not
the honour of being the Duke of Bedford; I am M. D’Eon, and can take
perfectly good care of myself;’ adding, wishing to escape all further
interference: ‘I have an engagement at the play-house this evening, and
beg to take leave of your Excellency.’ On turning to leave the room he
was surprised to find the door locked, and said somewhat testily to the
ministers, that he never could have believed it possible for a minister
plenipotentiary from France to find himself a prisoner in England, in the
house of a Secretary of State; whereupon Lord Halifax handed him a slip
of paper, with the request that he would attach his signature to what was
written on it. D’Eon read the note, and as he persisted in refusing to
sign it, although repeatedly pressed to do so by the ministers, the door
was thrown open, and a detachment of the Guards, with bayonets fixed,
occupied the room in which the company was assembled, and the adjoining
chambers as well. There were no means of retreat. On seeing the officer,
D’Eon said: ‘Do your duty and I will do mine. If it is to see me home
that you have come I need no soldiers, for I can go perfectly well alone
and on foot.’ Then, addressing the ministers, he intimated that when
his regiment again looked upon the uniform he was wearing, it should
either be unsullied or drenched in blood! A compromise was effected,
the soldiers were withdrawn, and the Chevalier signed the following
declaration ‘in obedience to orders.’

    ‘The Chevalier D’Eon gives his word of honour to the Earls of
    Sandwich and Halifax that he will not fight M. de Vergy or
    insult him in any way, without previously communicating his
    intention to the said earls, in order that they may be able
    to prevent any evil consequences resulting from the Chevalier
    D’Eon’s intentions and conduct.

                         ‘(Signed) ‘The Chevalier D’EON DE BEAUMONT,

    ‘By order and through the respect I owe to the ambassador of
    the King my master.’

                                            ‘(Signed) ‘DUNK HALIFAX.
                                            ‘SANDWICH.
                                            ‘GUERCHY.’

    ‘Great George Street, October 26, 1763.’

Beyond reporting the circumstance of the Guards being summoned during
the evening of October 26 to keep the peace, the daily papers gave no
details of what passed in the reception-rooms of one of the King’s
ministers;[135] a variety of inaccurate versions found easy credence, and
one other blunder was added to the acts of a blundering ministry.

[Sidenote: AN IMMATURE DUELLIST.]

De Vergy was true to his tryst. ‘Here am I, sir, in fighting trim, only
let me ask you a question. Are you minister plenipotentiary or a captain
of dragoons? because if you are a minister I retire.’ ‘I am delighted to
see you, for I have been expecting you. To you, I am simply a dragoon.’
D’Eon then secured the door, intending to detain his visitor until he had
sent word to the Embassy that de Vergy was with him. ‘Do not touch me!’
cried de Vergy in alarm; ‘do not touch me!’ ‘What!’ said D’Eon smiling,
‘you come to me in fighting trim, and are afraid lest I should touch you?
No. I merely intend that you shall be arrested.’ Then, leading him into
his bed-chamber where were writing materials: ‘I require you to read this
note, and sign it in duplicate.’ De Vergy started at seeing a brace of
cavalry pistols and a sabre. ‘Do not kill me!’ D’Eon lay a pistol on the
floor, and putting his foot on it said: ‘There, it won’t bite you. Now,
sign with a will.’

    ‘I, the undersigned, promise the Chevalier D’Eon, Captain of
    Dragoons, on my word of honour, that I will produce at the
    French Embassy in London, in the course of fifteen days, or
    at the furthest, one month, proper letters of recommendation
    from persons well known, or in office, at Versailles or Paris;
    failing which, I again give my word of honour to M. D’Eon that
    I shall never in future make my appearance before the Count
    and Countess de Guerchy, except as a very great, one of the
    greatest of adventurers.’

    ‘London, October 27, 1763,
    At a quarter past ten in the morning.’

De Vergy quickly put his name to both slips, and was making for the door
when D’Eon stopped him. ‘I must trouble you to leave by the back way; my
friends only pass through that door. Tell me who you are, or I shall hand
you over to the Embassy.’ ‘M. D’Eon, do not detain me here or I am a lost
man.’ ‘Well, Mr. Adventurer, you may go; I do not wish for the death of
a sinner, but rather for his conversion. If you bring letters and prove
to me that you are an honest man, I shall be a good friend to you.’ D’Eon
at once sent the duplicate of de Vergy’s declaration to the ambassador,
who complimented him upon his honourable behaviour; and de Vergy, having
made the best of his way to the police-court, to lodge a complaint
against the man who had been bullying him that morning, the Chevalier
received the following notice in the course of the day:—

    ‘Mr. Kynaston, Justice of the Peace, presents his compliments
    to the Chevalier D’Eon, and has to inform him that M. de Vergy
    has sworn information against him for wishing to break the
    peace. Mr. Kynaston therefore requests that M. D’Eon will
    appear before him at six o’clock precisely, this evening, at
    Sir John Fielding’s, Bow Street, Covent Garden, to answer the
    charge of the said M. de Vergy.’[136]

    ‘Bow Street, Covent Garden, October 27, 1763.’

No notice was taken of this summons by the Chevalier, in the first
place because it was not authenticated by any signature, and because as
minister plenipotentiary he did not consider himself bound to answer it.
The matter went no further.

[Sidenote: THE COUNT DE GUERCHY BALKED.]

Regardless of his dignity, the ambassador continued to importune D’Eon
for the surrender of his papers, advances that were now met in that
spirit of defiance the Chevalier thought himself safe in assuming, armed
as he was with the King’s secret commands. De Guerchy was furious at
D’Eon’s obstinacy and intractability, and resorted to endless expedients
for injuring him in public and private estimation. Acting as he did, in
concert with de Praslin, his first care was to circulate the report of
the Chevalier’s insanity, which he even carried to the Princess Augusta
at Court. He caused two damaging pamphlets to be published,[137] and
further annoyed him in a hundred different ways, even to the jeopardy of
his person, hoping to drive him out of the country and back to France.
De Guerchy, however, was no match for his dexterous subordinate, and
he so far forgot himself as to entreat the Duke de Choiseul to write
a flattering and coaxing letter to the Chevalier, under the title of
minister plenipotentiary, to invite him to repair to Versailles and lay
his grievances before the King. ‘You will perhaps think me a fool for
asking you to resort to means so little consonant with your character,
but I do not see my way to anything else for the present.’[138]

The Chevalier did lay his grievances before the King, but in a manner
very different to that intended by de Guerchy, for he reported in a long
despatch, taken to Versailles by his kinsman and collaborator, de la
Rosière, the treatment he had received at the hands of the ambassador,
and his own conduct under the circumstances. We give a few extracts only,
such as are indispensable to our narrative:—

    _Secret and Important. To the Counsellor and his Deputy._[139]

                                         ‘London, November 18, 1763.

    ‘M. de la Rosière will give you an account of all the tricks,
    entreaties, threats, promises, &c., to which the Count de
    Guerchy has resorted, in his endeavours to discover the secret
    motives of my conduct. He will also inform you of the manner
    in which I have eluded all his questions, and the little
    importance I have attached to his promises and threats. I do
    not think it possible to carry matters further than I have
    done, nor for any ambassador, or indeed for any man in the
    world to be more humiliated and mystified than is the Count
    de Guerchy. As to his threats, I scorn them; I have told him
    personally that I am firmly determined to resist him, and that
    should he make his appearance with another detachment of the
    Guards, I would not attack him, but if he cared to call upon
    me, he should see how I received him at my door. My door is
    narrow, and only sufficiently wide to enable one person to
    enter at a time. I am still Minister Plenipotentiary, for I
    have not taken leave, and if I choose, I shall take my stand
    on political grounds, for the next twelve months, before I
    apply for an audience of leave. All I need is sufficient to
    meet the expenses of my lodgings and board. La Rosière will
    tell you that I have prepared eighteen points of defence, which
    must be carried before I can be compelled to take my leave.
    I alone, and La Rosière, if he remembers them, know what are
    those points of defence, and when the Count de Guerchy and Lord
    Halifax attacked me for the first time, I unmasked one redoubt,
    and they met with a reverse. M. de Guerchy, S——, and M—— being
    greatly irritated at my stay at this Court, where the King, the
    Queen, and the royal family continue to treat me with the same
    consideration as hitherto, and at a loss to know to what saint
    they should offer a vow to ensure my retirement, have resorted
    to the darkest and most iniquitous expedients.’

[Sidenote: ANGUIS IN HERBA.]

    ‘On Friday, October 28, the Count de Guerchy was dining with
    Lord Sandwich, and I went to dine at the French Embassy, where
    the company included the Countess de Guerchy, her daughter,
    M. de Blosset, the Count d’Allonville, and M. Monin. Soon
    after dinner, the Countess went out with her daughter, and
    I remained with the gentlemen who chattered like magpies. I
    began to feel unwell and very drowsy. On leaving the house,
    the use of a sedan-chair at the door was offered me, but I
    refused, preferring to walk home, where, in spite of myself,
    I fell sound asleep in my easy chair. Feeling worse, and as
    if my stomach were on fire, I went to bed early, and although
    in the habit of rising at six or seven, I slept soundly until
    midday, when La Rosière awoke me by violently kicking at the
    door. I have since discovered that M. de Guerchy, who has a
    physician in his house, caused opium to be put into my wine, in
    the belief that I should fall into a deep sleep after dinner,
    when I would have been placed in a chair, and instead of being
    taken to my own home, carried to the Thames, where it appears
    there was a boat in readiness to take me away. La Rosière will
    corroborate what I say.[140]

    ‘The following evening M. Monin came to dine with me. I
    spoke to him of my indisposition, and he told me that he had
    experienced similar, but not so serious symptoms. Several days
    elapsed, and the Count de Guerchy, accompanied by his two
    aides-de-camp, came to me before nine in the morning. They
    inspected my rooms, and the ambassador asked what ailed me. I
    replied with Burgundian candour: “I have been very unwell since
    I dined at your Excellency’s table on the 28th; it would appear
    that your scullery maids are not careful to scour their pots
    and pans. This comes of keeping a large establishment; one is
    poisoned without knowing or wishing it.” The Count de Guerchy
    then said: “I have ordered my butler to keep a better eye on
    the kitchen department, for these gentlemen and M. Monin have
    also felt unwell. We are going to walk to Westminster, and had
    you not been indisposed, I should have asked you to accompany
    us....”

    ‘Two days subsequently to the ambassador’s visit, a locksmith
    called to fit some screws to my door. I guessed what was to
    happen, but admitted the man, and feigning to be at work at my
    writing table, kept my eye on him. He oiled the lock, removed
    the key from inside to outside the door, and in doing so
    very smartly took a wax impression of it. I contained myself
    sufficiently to ask what I owed him for his labour.’

These incidents, the attempts made to bribe his servants, the fact of
a sedan being continually stationed at his door, although it was not
ordered, convinced him of some bold design on his person and papers, and
he resolved upon leaving his apartments in Dover Street, which he did
on November 9, removing to the house of a Mr. Lautem, wine merchant, 32
Brewer Street, Golden Square, which became his abode for many years after.

A puerile annoyance to which D’Eon had been subjected during the last
few days of his stay in Dover Street, was a rapping and plaintive sounds
at two o’clock every morning, which proceeded from the flue of a chimney
communicating between his own bedroom, and the apartments in the floor
below occupied by L’Escallier, private secretary to the ambassador, who,
as the zealous auxiliary in the plots of his master, employed a young
sweep to ascend the chimney and make ‘ghostly noises.’ The count was
trying very hard to pass off D’Eon for a madman, and that he might obtain
evidence to that effect, had conceived this bright idea for frightening
the Chevalier, imagining that such noises and groans in the dark would
terrify him, cause him to leave his bed and summon the servants. Monin,
the count’s old tutor, who lodged in the room above L’Escallier and the
other dependants devoted to him, would be able to depose that nothing was
found; that there was no cause for alarm, and thus prove the minister
plenipotentiary’s insanity, or at any rate his being a visionary, which
would go far towards completing the success of the scheme for having him
arrested and confined as a lunatic. ‘This incident of itself suffices to
illustrate the meanness and wickedness of the count and his party.’[141]

[Sidenote: MAD, OR NOT MAD?]

Although a good deal of trouble was taken to persuade Louis XV. that
his minister plenipotentiary in London was demented, he does not appear
ever to have seriously believed in the accusation. After seeing D’Eon’s
letters of September 25 to de Praslin and de Guerchy, we find the King
writing to Tercier, October 11, 1763:—

    ‘ ... D’Eon has written several singular letters; it is
    apparently his office of Minister Plenipotentiary that has
    turned his head. M. de Praslin has in consequence proposed that
    he should be made to come here, when his condition will be
    inquired into. If he is mad, be on your guard lest he should
    divulge anything....’ In another letter, dated October 12:—‘...
    You will see D’Eon upon his arrival in Paris, and I authorise
    you to concert with him for taking every precaution that the
    secret be guarded....’ Again, October 21:—‘... You may send
    the letter to D’Eon if you are quite certain that he has not
    already taken his departure....’ Finally, December 30:—‘...
    M. D’Eon is not mad, but he is proud and a very extraordinary
    person....’[142]

It is possible that the representations of the French ministers on
D’Eon’s mental condition, received some support from Walpole’s chit-chat
to the Earl of Hertford, ambassador in Paris.

    ‘D’Eon is here still,’ wrote the former, on November 25, 1763;
    ‘I know nothing more of him, but that the honour of having a
    hand in the peace overset his poor brain. This was evident
    on the fatal night at Lord Halifax’s; when they told him his
    behaviour was a breach of the peace, he was quite distracted,
    thinking it was the _peace_ between his country and this.’

As Walpole was not present at Lord Halifax’s the evening of October 26,
he probably obtained these details from his friend de Guerchy.

Thwarted at all points by the Chevalier, who was proving himself to
be his superior in shrewdness and audacity, and indeed in every other
quality that the circumstances during their sensational disputes
necessitated, and dreading the certain exposure, by his intended victim,
of the criminal act of which he had been guilty, the ambassador,
miserably perplexed, entreated his valued friend de Praslin to extricate
him out of a position which had become quite unendurable. The result
was a joyous one to de Guerchy, a special courier having brought a
request to the British Government for the extradition of D’Eon and
the seizure of all his papers; but with his habitual foresight and
caution, the King took care to forestall the ministers by despatching a
secret messenger with written instructions to his ambassador and to his
minister plenipotentiary, neither of whom was to be made aware of the
communication received by the other.

    _Louis XV. to the Count de Guerchy._

                                   ‘Fontainebleau, November 4, 1763.

    ‘Monsieur le Comte,—The Duke de Praslin transmits to you, this
    day, a demand for extradition addressed by us to the ministers
    of our brother, his Majesty the King of Great Britain, having
    reference to the person of the Sieur D’Eon de Beaumont. If,
    as we think, his Britannic Majesty accedes to our demand, it
    will be particularly agreeable to us that you retain the papers
    you will find in the possession of the Sieur D’Eon, without
    communicating their contents to anybody. It is our will that
    they be kept entirely, and without exception, secret, and that
    the said papers being previously carefully sealed, shall remain
    in your keeping until you take your next annual trip, when you
    will deliver them to ourselves in person. We have learnt that
    M. Monin, your secretary, has some knowledge of the place where
    these papers are likely to have been deposited by the Chevalier
    D’Eon. If it is true that M. Monin has any idea of the sort,
    we request you to make the same known to us, after having
    communicated to him the contents of this letter in our hand. In
    thus doing, we shall be specially pleased.

                                                            ‘LOUIS.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Louis XV. to the Chevalier D’Eon._

                                   ‘Fontainebleau, November 4, 1763.

    ‘I warn you that a demand for extradition, having reference
    to your person and signed with my stamp, has this day been
    addressed to Guerchy to be transmitted by him to the ministers
    of his Britannic Majesty, the said demand being accompanied
    by police officers to assist in its execution. If you cannot
    make your escape, save at least your papers, and do not trust
    M. Monin, Guerchy’s secretary and your friend. He is betraying
    you.[143]

                                                            ‘LOUIS.’

Thus was the Chevalier about to be dealt with as an ordinary malefactor
for having braved the fury of de Praslin and of the ambassador, losing
also his best friend de Nivernois, in his intense devotion to the King
whose secret correspondence and interests in England he was protecting;
and because his freedom was imperilled by the ministers of France, the
selfish, vacillating, and weak monarch was secretly scheming for the
transfer of the compromising papers into the custody of the very man
from whom it had cost D’Eon so much to withhold them, and for doing
which he had been fast ensuring his own ruin. The King was feeling that
the step he had taken threatened imminent danger to the other secret
agents immediately concerned—the Count de Broglio and Tercier, but
his conscience was easily relieved, and in addressing a few words of
explanation and comfort to the latter, he fancied he was justifying his
course of action, and reassuring those who were serving him far more
faithfully than he deserved.

    ‘I am writing to Guerchy, and order him to keep the secret
    from everybody. I am instructing him to keep all the papers
    sealed, until his return to Paris upon the annual trip he
    proposes taking.... If Guerchy betrays the secret, he betrays
    me, _and will be a lost man_. If he is a man of honour, he
    will not do so; if he is a knave, he deserves to be hanged. It
    is very clear that you and the Count de Broglio are uneasy.
    Be reassured, I am much more unconcerned.... Having so freely
    entrusted Guerchy with the secret, he will keep it.... The case
    is different with Madame de Guerchy. I hope he will not tell
    his wife anything about it....’[144]

De Broglie was of an entirely different opinion. Upon hearing of what the
King had done, he declared to Tercier, in a note he wrote from his place
of exile, that de Guerchy would assuredly divulge the secret, and that
his wife was as assuredly already acquainted with it.[145]




CHAPTER VIII.

    Refusal of the British Government to deliver D’Eon—A force
    organised to kidnap him—Mines and garrisons his house against
    intrusion—De Guerchy reports to Louis XV. his failure to obtain
    the secret papers—D’Eon’s letter to his mother—Publication
    of official and private letters of ministers, ambassadors,
    &c.—Consternation produced in consequence—Applies to enter the
    service of a foreign State—Appeals to de Broglio and Tercier on
    his situation—A conciliatory letter the result.


In hastening to make a formal demand for the arrest of D’Eon and seizure
of all his papers, the French ambassador was feeling satisfied that
the days of his obnoxious subordinate were numbered, but ‘one of the
qualities of a great general is the glance, in war, that reveals to him
the advantages and disadvantages of the field on which the contest is
about to take place. Had General de Guerchy known this, would he ever
have selected the ground of liberty in London and Westminster to wage
an unjust and despotic war against the Chevalier D’Eon? But this would
not be matter for surprise, when it was once known that at the battle of
Minden he gave the marvellous advice to place cavalry in the centre and
infantry on the wings. The result of the two actions could not but be
similar.’[146]

The Chevalier was perfectly safe. Lord Halifax sent the case, ‘which
was of a very extraordinary kind and without any known precedent,’ for
the consideration of the Advocate and Solicitor-General, and eventually
had to inform the French ambassador that, ‘according to the law of the
kingdom, it would be impossible to justify the seizure either of the
person or of the papers’ of the Chevalier D’Eon.[147]

Since he could not be legally apprehended, the attempt was to be made,
under de Guerchy’s authority, to kidnap the Chevalier, and for this
purpose some twenty-five to thirty French police officers and spies, in
charge of an officer, and who had already been some days in London, were
watching a favourable opportunity for seizing and putting him into a
six-oared boat in readiness at Westminster, whence he was to be conveyed
to a small vessel, manned by twenty armed men, lying at Gravesend.

The Chevalier was fully aware of the proceedings of his enemies, and took
his precautions accordingly. The security of the King’s papers being
his first care, he confided a portion of them to de la Rosière, and
actually sent him to France, there to remain, at least for a time. Then,
to ensure himself from the abduction with which he was now threatened
by an organised force, having concealed the remainder of the papers in
his apartments, he converted them into a stronghold after the following
manner:—His bedroom, sitting-room, and study on the first floor were
mined, also the staircase, which he further intrenched. He kept a lamp
burning throughout the night, and had a red-hot poker at his side during
the day. His arsenal included four brace of pistols, two guns, and eight
sabres. The garrison consisted of several dragoons of his old regiment,
for whom he had sent, and some deserters he picked up in London, all
trusty men, who occupied the basement with orders to admit the police
officers should they at any time seek to enter, and then cut off their
retreat while he defended the intrenchment. It was arranged that, in
the event of his being worsted, he should make a preconcerted signal
to intimate that they were to run for their lives, whilst he fired the
mine.[148]

[Sidenote: ‘NOT SO BLACK A DEVIL.’]

Thus prepared, D’Eon resolutely awaited eventualities. De Guerchy made
one other advance, after failure of the demand for extradition. He sent
a conciliatory letter to the Chevalier, by one of the gentlemen at the
Embassy, in which he renewed application for the surrender of the King’s
papers. The reception with which the attaché met may well be gathered by
the nature of D’Eon’s reply:—

                                    ‘London, December 1, 1763,
                                    ‘At four o’clock in the morning.

    ‘Sir,—M. Prémarets fled from my house in such a hurry last
    night that he gave me no time, either to read the whole of your
    Excellency’s letter or to speak to him. I invited him, however,
    to dinner, and to drink some good wine from Tonnerre; but he
    became unnecessarily alarmed, and insisted upon running away.
    Although a dragoon, I am not so black a devil as people would
    make me, and if your Excellency could see into my heart, you
    would find a very pure and a very clear conscience.... With
    regard to the King’s papers for which you ask me, it is with
    an aching heart that I am obliged to tell your Excellency I
    cannot have the honour of delivering them without an express
    order from the King, and I beg that you will communicate this
    to those at Court. If you have such an order, be good enough to
    send it to me by my friend M. Monin; he has known me long, and
    must be fully persuaded that I will not only obey the orders
    of my master, but will die for him if needs be. I value my
    life at four _sous_, and those four _sous_ I give to the poor.
    Your Excellency requires no length of time to obtain an order
    from the King, and if in the interim you should require any
    information in the interests of the service, I will give all
    it is in my power to communicate. Do not judge me hastily, and
    do not condemn me as yet; the future may teach you something.
    I repeat to you my entreaty to be thoroughly persuaded, that
    I have never wished to fail in my respect towards the Duke
    de Praslin and towards yourself; but bear in mind that I am
    determined to be otherwise, if you persist in continually
    seeking to force me to forget my duty, my sense of honour, of
    equity, and of liberty. Recollect, that when St. Peter was
    asleep on the Mount of Olives, he was thus reproached by his
    Master: “_Spiritus quidem promptus est, caro vero infirma._”
    I therefore beg of you, sir, to allow me to sleep in peace in
    London, where I will firmly await the spies that have been sent
    to watch me....’[149]

The Chevalier was thus proving himself to be more than a match for the
ambassador, who was finally obliged to confess to the King his complete
failure in every effort he had made to execute his Majesty’s commands.

    _The Count de Guerchy to Louis XV._

                                          ‘London, December 6, 1763.

    ‘Sire,—I have been expecting to execute the orders contained
    in the letter your Majesty did me the honour to address to me
    from Fontainebleau on November 4, before replying to it; but
    I have found it quite impracticable to do so, notwithstanding
    the various means employed. Your Majesty will have been
    informed, by my despatch, of the obstacles with which I meet
    in my endeavours to possess myself of D’Eon’s papers, for
    he persistently refuses to deliver them to me, in spite of
    the order he has received from M. de Praslin in the name of
    your Majesty.[150] This is one of the peculiarities of his
    insanity, which, however, does not affect him on all points.
    Your Majesty will also have been informed that the Court of
    London has authoritatively refused my request, in saying that
    it was against the laws of the country. At any rate, the King
    of England and his ministers are very anxious to get rid of
    this individual. I have not been able to seize upon his person,
    either by force or by stratagem, because he is no longer with
    me, nor has he been here since going to such extremes. I have
    communicated to Monin your Majesty’s commands as directed;
    he tells me he has good reason for believing, as the result
    of several questions he has put to D’Eon, that no papers
    concerning your Majesty, personally, have been brought to
    London, and he thinks it more probable that they have been left
    in Paris.... I deem it expedient to send this letter by M. le
    Bel. I am deeply grieved, Sire, at not being able to furnish
    your Majesty upon this occasion with proofs of the fervent zeal
    by which I will be actuated through life.’

                                ENCLOSURE.

                 _Memorandum from M. Monin to the King._

[Sidenote: A FAITHFUL DEPOSITARY.]

    ‘In consequence of his Majesty’s commands signified to Monin,
    he has been doubly diligent in devising means for recovering
    the papers his Majesty desires to possess. The glimmers of
    hope he has sometimes entertained, warranted as they were by
    a certain air of confidence and openness of heart on the part
    of M. D’Eon, have vanished, and all those means to which the
    ambassador has had recourse have proved unavailing. Monin has
    restricted himself to seeking to discover where the papers are
    kept or concealed. M. D’Eon has admitted to having deposited
    them in different places without naming them, but of one fact
    Monin is certain, and it is this. Previous to M. de Guerchy’s
    departure for England, M. D’Eon lodged a box, containing
    papers, with M. Tercier, where he, Monin, saw it; and so
    soon as he had learnt of M. D’Eon’s recall, he deemed it his
    duty, as a faithful and zealous subject, to recommend to M.
    Tercier that he should obtain his Majesty’s instructions as
    to its contents. I have no doubt [_sic_] that M. Tercier, who
    considered the recommendation as expedient and important, has
    acted accordingly; this portion of his Majesty’s secrets should
    therefore be in his hands.’[151]

We have been obliged to reproduce, almost at length, the communications
received by the King from de Guerchy, because they show how successfully
D’Eon was keeping at bay, or misleading all those, whose hands he
considered were lifted against him. ‘I have at last received a letter
from M. de Guerchy with Monin’s memorandum enclosed, which I send
to you,’ wrote Louis XV. to Tercier; and then the King betrays his
uneasiness and restless anxiety for the safety of his papers, and yet his
objection to having them in his own possession or anywhere about him,
fearing perhaps a repetition of the scene in the month of June. ‘Take
care of the Sieur de la Rosière, or rather of his papers, for it is known
that he is here, and if he were visited all might be discovered.’[152]

De Guerchy’s next step was to submit to Lord Halifax, so far as the
wording was concerned, and with the desire that it should be inserted in
the official newspaper, a paragraph to the effect that the Chevalier was
to be excluded, in the future, from the British Court.[153] His request
was complied with, and an exact translation of the notice, under date of
the ambassador’s letter, appeared in an early number of the _Gazette_:—

                                            ‘St. James’, December 6.

    ‘The Most Christian King having, upon his Ambassador Count
    de Guerchy’s arrival here, sent to the Chevalier D’Eon de
    Beaumont, who had the character of Minister Plenipotentiary to
    this Court, his revocation from hence, with a letter addressed
    to his Britannic Majesty; and having been informed that M.
    D’Eon persisted in refusing to pay obedience to his orders,
    and to present the King his master’s letter; his said Most
    Christian Majesty therefore wrote a second letter to the King,
    and commanded his Ambassador to present the same immediately,
    which, having been accordingly done, his Majesty has been
    pleased to declare that the said M. D’Eon has no longer any
    character here, and has forbid him the Court.’[154]

[Sidenote: THE COUNT DE BROGLIO’S ALARM.]

Thus divested of his dignity, the Chevalier was also declared guilty of
high treason, and all arrears of emoluments due to him were forfeited to
the Crown—a pitiful situation naturally evoking very warm sympathy on the
part of his old chief and well-wisher, the Count de Broglio, who himself
had long been paying the penalty of his devotion to their mystery-loving
royal master.[155] But, apart from personal considerations for D’Eon,
the dangers to be apprehended from such limitless persecution were
considerable, as the count took immediate occasion to remind the King.

    ‘It is an incontestable fact that the Sieur D’Eon is driven to
    despair; that without your Majesty’s favour he will meet with a
    miserable fate in France, and that he possesses sure means of
    making a large fortune in England.... If, in revenge for the
    bad treatment he is experiencing, and impelled by the necessity
    of obtaining a living, he should publish your Majesty’s
    instructions, which he holds, were he even to communicate
    them to English ministers, what might not be the unfortunate
    results? Should we not have to apprehend that the sacred person
    of your Majesty would be compromised, and that a declaration of
    war on the part of England would be inevitable?’

The count concluded his letter by enjoining that the ambassador should
leave D’Eon in peace, and that one of his friends should be sent with an
order signed by the King, requiring him, in warm-hearted terms, to return
to France, with the special assurance that royal protection should not
fail him.[156]

The calamity which befell the Chevalier did not visit him alone; it
encompassed his mother and other relatives, and even their dependants
at home. He was tenderly attached to his only parent, upon whom he had
long since settled his little property, yet to her solicitude and gentle
warnings he replied with all the vehemence of his strong and stormy
nature.

[Sidenote: ‘TO MY DEAR MOTHER.’]

    _To Madame D’Eon de Beaumont, Tonnerre._

                                         ‘London, December 30, 1763.

    ‘I have received, my dear mother, all the woeful and piteous
    letters you have taken the trouble to write to me. _Why weepest
    thou, woman of little faith?_ as it is said in Scripture.
    Remember that our Lord, in the famed Temple of Jerusalem, said
    to his mother: _Woman, what have I to do with thee?_ yet the
    mother was older than the Son. How this word _woman_, &c.,
    caused the Scribes and Pharisees to laugh, and has shocked all
    the Doctors of the New Law, even those of Sorbonne! I will
    say to you with greater tenderness: my mother, what is there
    in common between your affairs at Tonnerre, and my political
    affairs in London? Do go on planting your cabbages in peace,
    weeding your garden and enjoying its fruit; drink the milk of
    your cows and the wine of your vines, and leave me in peace
    to the foolish sayings at Paris and Versailles. Dry up your
    tears, which grieve without comforting me. I am not in need
    of consolation, because I am not in the least sad.... I do my
    duty, and my adversaries, who call themselves great men, do
    not perform theirs—being guided in their actions by caprice
    and personal interests, and not in the least degree in the
    interests of justice, and for the welfare of the King and
    country. Let them do as they please, I will do as I think
    proper.... I do not fear the thunderbolts of these little
    Jupiters, be they far or near. This is all I have to say,
    therefore have your mind at ease, as is mine, and if you come
    to see me in London I shall be delighted, and I will take as
    good care of you as I do of the Court papers, which M. de
    Guerchy will not have except on good grounds, with colours
    flying, match alight, ammunition at hand, and drums beating. He
    shall not even have the envelopes of the letters, I swear it to
    you by all that is sacred, unless he brings to me an authentic
    order from the King, my master and his, and this is what he has
    not been able to effect hitherto.

    ‘Do not believe I am insane, because reports to that effect
    have reached Paris. I can assure you that my acts, in my
    supposed state of madness, would be acts of wisdom on the
    part of certain ambassadors. I am, and shall continue to be,
    the faithful servant of the King, but I am not, nor do I wish
    to be, the sordid servant of certain nobles, his worthless
    varlets. To those who tell you that your son is a wild animal
    reared in the forests of Burgundy or of Champagne (M. de
    Guerchy has already said this to me), reply as I and my friend
    Jean Jacques do, that nature treats all animals abandoned to
    her care with a certain predilection that seems to show how
    jealous she is of this right. The horse, the cat, the bull,
    and even the ass, should they become ambassadors, are usually
    taller, of a more robust constitution, more vigorous, stronger,
    and more courageous in forest-land than when living amongst
    us; they lose half these advantages in becoming domesticated;
    and it might be said that all our concern in well treating
    and feeding those animals, only tends to degenerate them. It
    is the same with man; in becoming social and the slave of the
    great, or of those who ape to be so, he becomes weak, timid,
    servile, and his inactive and effeminate style of living
    suffices to unnerve his strength and courage.... As to my huge
    brother-in-law, Mr. Gorman,[157] let him attend to his own
    affairs in Paris, I do not need his advice or that of any other
    person.... Let everybody mind his own business. I know my own
    affairs, not a soul in the world shall poke his nose into them,
    or I will singe his moustache.... Since you cannot voler as
    birds do, as great ladies and great gentlemen do, I will turn
    over to you, with great pleasure, my pension of 2,000 livres
    on the privy purse, which, in addition to what you possess,
    will enable you to live comfortably in some convent near
    Paris.... If you wish to do what is best, remain quietly in
    your charming retreat at Tonnerre, and do not return to Paris
    unless the Court pays your travelling expenses in some surer
    way than it has mine, and remember, that whether men praise or
    blame you, you are none the better or the worse. _The glory
    of the righteous is in their conscience, and not in the praise
    of man._ I embrace you tenderly.... If you continue to weep, I
    shall have to supply you with some of the English East India
    Company’s pocket-handkerchiefs, and you will no longer be my
    mother if you are not the virtuous woman spoken of by Solomon,
    and which I have not as yet been able to find anywhere....
    Be at ease—these enemies are harmless as sheep; they are
    mischievous rather than dangerous.’[158]

D’Eon’s determination not to deliver any of the papers in his possession,
left no alternative to de Guerchy other than to obtain from him an
official statement in writing of his refusal to obey the King’s
orders. This was effected at the residence of the Chevalier, who, ever
apprehensive of treachery on the part of the ambassador’s emissaries,
whenever and wherever he met them, held himself in readiness armed, and
levelling his gun at the witnesses, cried, ‘It is at the end of this that
you will find the King’s papers; come and take them.’[159]

Mention has been made of the publication of a couple of pamphlets by
direction of de Guerchy, as being one of the measures to which his
Excellency resorted for bringing the Chevalier into disrepute.[160]
They had reference to the scene at Lord Halifax’s house on the evening
of October 26, and to the minister plenipotentiary’s intercourse with
Treyssac de Vergy. D’Eon never missed the opportunity for committing pen
to paper, and in his turn published a lengthened statement, likewise in
the form of a pamphlet.[161] It was a faithful recital of facts, and
as such, he immediately forwarded a copy to his good friend the Duke
de Choiseul, who, not being one of the executive triumvirate engaged
in doing the will of the Marquise de Pompadour, had but a few weeks
previously offered the Chevalier his protection and restoration to the
army.[162] On issuing the ‘Note,’ he wrote to the King and to his secret
confidants that he was avenging his honour thus infamously attacked, and
hoped to receive orders which he had no desire to see nullified by any
precipitate conduct on his part.... Great was his dismay at the nature of
Tercier’s communication in reply.

                                     ‘Versailles, December 27, 1763.

    ‘Your enemies have become all-powerful; far from diminishing,
    their influence over the King has increased, and they rule him
    completely. You are not unaware that Madame de Pompadour is
    the cause of all your troubles. You and the Count de Broglio
    are lost, if you do not avail yourself of all the courage
    and all the prudence with which you are endowed by Heaven,
    to save yourself from being compromised, or from having your
    person seized and your papers carried off. You and the Count
    de Broglio have only to rely, but in secret, upon the King
    who cannot abandon you, but whose policy would sacrifice you
    entirely, perhaps, to his mistress and to his ministers,
    notwithstanding his great regard for you. Rely upon my
    unalterable devotion.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘Such is the language of one of those in whose words it is
    his Majesty’s pleasure that I should place the most implicit
    confidence!’ observes D’Eon. ‘I weigh it with all the respect
    due to the throne. The safety of the King’s correspondence, of
    that of the Count de Broglio, and of my own, is entrusted to
    me, to my prudence and to my courage. Secretly, my King will
    support me if I escape out of the hands of his ministers, who
    will exact from him, though to his regret, the sacrifice of my
    person. What could be more outrageous! No matter, my mind is
    made up. My enemies invite me into the arena; I will rush upon
    them and overwhelm them if I can; but I will not contend except
    with my own weapons, and I will not expose my sovereign. I am
    recommended to be bold and prudent. My answer to the Count de
    Guerchy’s “Contre-Note” will be the publication of my “Letters
    and Memoirs.” I avenge every imputation and crush my adversary;
    so much for courage. My chiefs, my relatives, my protectors and
    my friends speak in my favour by their letters and by mine, and
    if the base and ridiculous character of my adversary becomes
    thus revealed, he will only owe the exposure to the pure and
    simple publication of his friends’ and his own letters; so much
    for prudence.’

The ‘Contre-Note’[163] was a third pamphlet de Guerchy had the
weakness to employ Goudard to write, in vindication of himself and in
severe condemnation of D’Eon; it was a retort to the ‘Note’ that had
been addressed to him. D’Eon kept his word. The ‘Lettres, Mémoires,’
&c., which made their appearance, in quarto and octavo editions, are
frequently referred to in this work. The volume, divided into three
parts, opens with a violent and virulent attack on the French ambassador,
giving rise, in due course, to an action for libel, and is followed
by the Chevalier’s correspondence with the Dukes de Praslin and de
Nivernois, M. de Sainte-Foy, the Count de Guerchy, and others. Part II.
relates to D’Eon’s personal interests during his residence in London,
and Part III. gives some particulars of his services, with copies of
certificates, despatches, and letters, all favourable to himself. The
epigraph consists of three lines borrowed from Voltaire:—

    ‘Pardonnez; un soldat est mauvais courtisan.
    Nourri dans la Scythie, aux plaines d’Arbazan,
    J’ai pu servir la cour, et non pas la connaître.’

The motto is _Vita sine litteris mors est_, and the post face at the end
of Part II. is inscribed:—

    ‘If the precious selection that forms this little
    correspondence greatly offends the authors of the injustice
    from which I am suffering, I will give a second edition of
    Letters, without extracts and without blanks; the text will
    be as genuine as the book of Genesis, where the points of the
    Massorets will not be employed.’

The Chevalier was at no loss to justify himself for having thus exposed
the private correspondence of French ministers. When he saw that de
Guerchy and de Praslin made it their business to despatch courier after
courier to each other, and secretly spread reports upon the subject
of his affairs, he made up his mind to publish what disconcerted
their measures. Nobody was able to conceive how a young captain of
dragoons could have the temerity to be the first to impugn an old
lieutenant-general, Knight of the King’s Orders, his Majesty’s Ambassador
Extraordinary, a friend of thirty years’ standing of the Ministers of
France, a favourite of the King, and allied to several powerful houses;
but everybody was able to perceive, without any difficulty, that it was
the lieutenant-general and favourite ambassador who had commenced the
attack, and that the captain, minister plenipotentiary, was obliged
to defend himself. Was there cause for libel in writing against a
poisoner, an assassin, who commenced by hiring scribblers to tarnish his
reputation? Was there cause for libel in publicly defending, when openly
and publicly assailed, one’s honour, life, and liberty? Every law, human
and divine, justifies such defence. In every suit, in every contention,
in every quarrel, the aggressor is specially to be distinguished from the
aggressed, the oppressor from the oppressed! Offensive war is the act
of a tyrant; he who defends himself is justified. Had the count given
the Chevalier good wine at his table, in the place of poison, there
never would have been any dissension between them. The chief cause of
the Chevalier’s falling into disgrace with the French ambassador, lay
in the former’s evil or good luck, in seeing the latter take to flight
on the right bank of the Weser, when, being under fire of the English
and Hanoverians at the passage of that river, the Marshal de Broglio’s
order was delivered, directing him to give his support and distribute
ammunition to the troops. The recollection of that incident must have
been exceedingly disagreeable to the count, for when the Chevalier
reminded him, upon the memorable evening at Lord Halifax’s, that they
had served together during the war, de Guerchy told Lord Halifax, in the
presence of the other English ministers, that he had never met D’Eon, nor
was he at all concerned to know who were the aides-de-camp to the Count
and the Duke de Broglio. In reply, D’Eon maintained that he might perhaps
remember having entertained him at his head-quarters upon more than one
occasion, to discuss the hot pastry for which his cook was famous, and
that when retreating from Einbeck, his column having missed its way, he
had put it on the right road to Northeim.[164]

The giving his volume to the world produced the greatest consternation
amongst those of the ruling powers whose private letters, several of an
exceedingly delicate nature, had thus been made public, and in exposing
the secrets of ministers, D’Eon spared his friends as little as he did
his bitterest enemies, the King only, in whom his faith was implicit,
being held sacred by his daring spirit. The publication was no leap in
the dark, but an ill-considered act, an irreparable blunder which brought
upon him the extreme of gratuitous misery, and desertion by all those in
authority.

No sooner was this book out of the printer’s hands than the Count de
Guerchy secured a copy, and sat for several hours with his wife poring
over its contents. Some satirical passages on their love of economy
having led to a quarrel between the two, they threw the volume at each
other’s heads. ‘Could I have foreseen such a thing,’ said the Chevalier
upon being informed of the circumstance, ‘I should have issued the book
in a wooden binding!’[165]

[Sidenote: HORACE WALPOLE.]

As the publication caused a panic at Versailles, so was the sensation in
London enormous. This is what Walpole had to say about it:—

    ‘D’Eon has published (but to be sure you have already heard
    so) a most scandalous quarto, abusing Monsieur de Guerchy
    outrageously, and most offensive to Messieurs de Praslin
    and Nivernois. In truth I think he will have made all three
    irreconcilable enemies. The Duke de Praslin must be enraged as
    to the Duke’s carelessness and partiality to D’Eon, and will
    certainly grow to hate Guerchy, concluding the latter can never
    forgive _him_. D’Eon, even by his own account, is as culpable
    as possible, mad with pride, insolent, abusive, ungrateful,
    and dishonest—in short, a complication of abominations, yet
    originally ill-used by his Court, afterwards too well; above
    all, he has great malice, and great parts to put that malice
    in play. Though there are even many bad puns in his book, a
    very uncommon fault in a French book, yet there is much wit
    too. Monsieur de Guerchy is extremely hurt.... I could write
    pages to you upon this subject, for I am full of it—but I will
    send you the book. The Council have met to-day to consider what
    to do upon it. Most people think it difficult for them to do
    anything. Lord Mansfield thinks they can’—Walpole disliked the
    judge, and adds—‘but I fear he has a little alacrity on the
    severe side in such cases.’[166]

As I shall have occasion to return to Walpole, or rather to his letters,
I would limit myself in the interests of this history, seeing that the
opinions to which he gave expression were immatured except by his own
specious judgment, hastily and prematurely formed, to quoting Macaulay’s
estimate of that _gentleman usher at heart_. ‘He sneered at everybody,
put on every action the worst construction which it could bear,’ and we
are told, further, that he ‘spelt every man backward.’

[Sidenote: DRIVEN TO SEEK EXPATRIATION.]

A painful sense of oppression was produced on D’Eon by Tercier’s letter
of December 27, and nothing, not even his vigorous mind, could rouse him
out of the state of despondency into which he had fallen. To his kindest
of protectors, the Duke de Nivernois, he said, ‘... all my trust is in
your tender friendship for me, and all my fear lies in your weakness for
your friends.’ If the power of his enemies was too great, he continued,
to enable the duke to break asunder the chain of error, of falsehood,
and of iniquity, he should only ask permission, for himself and his two
cousins, to enter the service of a foreign State, a request they made
with their hearts plunged in the bitterest grief; for there were none
more ready than they to shed the last drop of their blood for the King
they adored, and their native land which they cherished.

    ‘... Since my zeal, my services, and my disinterestedness have
    incriminated me in my own country, I must, in spite of myself,
    seek a country where I shall be at liberty to lead the life of
    a good citizen. That country is found for me, Monsieur le Duc,
    this you know, and I will not hide it from you....’

In an enclosure, under flying seal, addressed to his other good friend
the Duke de Choiseul, he thus expressed himself:—

    ‘... Your cousinship to the Duke de Praslin, and private
    reasons, will no doubt have prevented you from rendering to
    me that justice which is my due, and which exists in your
    heart.... Forced as I am, by the revolting injustice I am
    experiencing, by the suppression of my pension out of the privy
    purse, and by the numerous enemies that my zeal, blind no doubt
    in the cause of my country, or that the envy of traitors to
    that same country have excited against me; I find myself under
    the grievous necessity of entreating you to do me the favour,
    to send the King’s permission that I, and two of my cousins,
    may enter the service of a foreign Power....’[167]

To D’Eon’s surprise, these letters remained unnoticed. He appealed to the
King, to the Count de Broglio, to Tercier, for support in his perplexing
situation, but nothing came. All were silent. Yet, for his own sake,
the count had never been callous to the cries of the Chevalier, nor was
he so now, for D’Eon’s doom, were the designs against him carried to a
successful issue, would be the harbinger of his own fate. He followed
up his suggestion of December 6 to the King, by proposing that his
secretary, the Chevalier Nort, should be sent to England to conciliate
D’Eon. The King approved, but with his customary dilatoriness nothing
was done. Then were brought the news of the recall from exile of the de
Broglios, and of the moribund condition of the Marquise de Pompadour, and
wearisome darkness, the poor proscribed one thought, would give place
to light, and relief be at hand! Still nothing came, though weeks had
passed; to remain thus disregarded and treated with silent contempt was
more than the Chevalier’s nature could endure. He again addressed himself
to Tercier, this time openly throwing the gauntlet, with what results
will be known hereafter.

[Sidenote: PROOF AGAINST CORRUPTION.]

    _To the Solicitor._[168]

                                            ‘London, March 23, 1764.

    ‘Sir,—Although the recall of the Marshal and of the Count de
    Broglio should be as useful and as necessary to the King’s
    service as to the ends of justice, in the settlement of my
    affairs, I cannot conceal from you my surprise at the complete
    silence of yourself and of the Count de Broglio, in the cruel
    position into which the wickedness, to say nothing more, of the
    Count de Guerchy has plunged me, and his enmity, particularly
    to the house of Broglio, which is the real origin of my
    misfortunes.

    ‘Your silence and my position are such, that I send M.
    Nardin[169] to Paris, to his friend la Rosière; he will
    relate to him, in person, all that has taken place since his
    departure, and the latter will deliver to you this letter, to
    request urgently that you will give me a categorical reply
    as to what I am or am not to expect, so that I may be guided
    accordingly. It is very sad, that after having sacrificed
    myself so willingly for the benefit and honour of the King’s
    service, I should have recourse to such explanations, or
    rather to such extremities. You must feel all the force of
    what I wish to say. I will never be the first to desert the
    King or my country, but if, unhappily, the King and my country
    should think proper to sacrifice me by deserting me, I shall
    be obliged, in spite of myself, to abandon the latter, and in
    doing so, I will justify myself before the whole of Europe, and
    nothing will be easier to me, as you are well aware. I admit
    that such a sacrifice will be hard for me, but it will also
    cost France dearly, and the very idea of this makes me shed
    tears. Yet, such are the extremes and the fatal resolutions
    which might be engendered by the ingratitude and intrigue that
    sustains an ambassador, so unworthy of the title as is the
    Count de Guerchy.

    ‘I will not conceal from you, sir, that the enemies of France,
    believing they may be able to take advantage of the cruel
    position in which I find myself, have invited me to enter
    their service. Whatever the benefits they offer, I cannot be
    influenced, and I shall be guided under these circumstances
    by my honour only; I have answered as became me, and have
    said that I could not enter into any engagement, as I still
    considered myself in the service of the King; and my King
    abandons me! And yet, from the very first, I have only acted
    in conformity with his great secret project, and his written
    orders which I will defend with my life.

    ‘You ought to know that scarcely had the Count de Guerchy
    superseded me here, than the subject was broached to him of the
    second demolition of the lunette and other works at Dunkirk,
    and that this second demolition, which I had successfully
    averted and set aside during the period of five months, was
    accomplished to the shame and prejudice of France.[170] I am
    truly ashamed for my country.

    ‘The leaders of the opposition have offered me any money I
    require, on condition that I deliver to them my papers and
    letters, under seal, promising to return them to me in exactly
    the same state when the money is brought to me.[171] I unbosom
    myself to you, and you must feel how repugnant to me must be
    such an expedient. And yet, if I am forsaken, what would you
    have me do? As to the papers of the Counsellor and of his
    deputy, I guard them more jealously than ever; I have them all,
    also Rosière’s. The cypher alone I burnt in his presence, and
    the whole are so well concealed in my study, that by means of
    a mine I have myself contrived, and several trains that lead
    to it from different parts of my room, I can in an instant
    blow my little study, the would-be rescuers, the papers and
    my own self, fifty feet into the air. But, if I am entirely
    forsaken, and if, between this and April 22, Easter Sunday, I
    do not receive a promise, signed by the King or by the Count
    de Broglio, to the effect that reparation will be made to me
    for all the ills I have endured at the hands of M. de Guerchy,
    then, sir, I declare to you formally and authentically, I shall
    lose all hope, and in forcing me to embrace the cause of the
    King of England, of his ministry and of the Houses of the Lords
    and Commons, _you must make up your mind to a war at no distant
    period, of which I shall surely be but the innocent cause,
    and this war will be inevitable_. The King of England will be
    driven into it by the nature of circumstances, by the voice of
    the nation, and by the opposition which is gaining, rather than
    losing, in strength. Here, sir, is my confession, and here are
    all the evils that will have been prepared by M. de Guerchy and
    his gang. Behold your great project, so glorious for the King
    and so advantageous to France, turning against you. Your reply,
    sir, fully authentic, and signed by the Counsellor, or at least
    by his deputy, will inform me if, by next Easter at the latest,
    I am to remain an honest Frenchman, or become, in spite of
    myself, an honest Englishman.’[172]

The King took the matter coolly enough. He knew his man, and must have
been full well persuaded that he could safely rely upon his loyalty and
attachment to his person, and that there was consequently no immediate
cause for alarm. When informed for the first time of the tempting offers
made to the Chevalier in England, he merely said: ‘I do not believe
that D’Eon will become an Englishman, for he has nothing to gain from
the ministry, and what will he do if he joins the opposition? Send him
two hundred ducats ...’ and then he wrote word to Tercier, ‘... I have
nothing to say as regards the Sieur D’Eon. I doubt that we should
have war, no matter what he were to say; but we must prevent such an
exposure.’ Still, as if impressed with the obvious necessity for being
wise in time, his Majesty added, ‘I approve of the despatch of the Sieur
de Nort; make every necessary arrangement accordingly.’[173]

[Sidenote: PUBLICATION OF ‘LETTRES,’ ETC., JUSTIFIED.]

It is possible that Tercier, who was in the habit of keeping D’Eon
informed of all that was passing at Court, so far as he was concerned,
had told him before their correspondence was interrupted that the King
‘did not at all care to see the “Mémoires” in print.’[174] At any rate,
in a second letter in which he pressed his case, and which quickly
followed the first, we find the Chevalier offering some passing words of
explanation on the course he had pursued.

                                       ‘London, March 27, 1764.[175]

    ‘Sir,—I hope that M. Nardin, whom I despatched on the morning
    of the 23rd to rejoin his friend La Rosière, and to cause to be
    remitted to you through him a very urgent letter from myself,
    is actually with you, and in a position to relate to La Rosière
    all that has occurred here during the last four months. The
    Count de Guerchy having thought proper to publish a lying
    apology for his conduct, or what is rather a libel against
    myself, full of wickedness and slander, I patiently waited
    awhile, and was then obliged to reply to it by unanswerable
    statements and letters. I have consequently published what
    I had to say, and have expressly made a bulky volume of it,
    that the project of our great secret affair may be the more
    completely screened.

    ‘Our poor ambassador, quite at his wit’s ends, has no idea
    beyond that of blind vengeance; he has been to his friend the
    Duke of Bedford, a man even more violent than himself; he
    has been to all the other ministers to get them to see the
    book; but all this has only turned to my advantage. He is at
    present moving heaven and earth, together with the Duke of
    Bedford, to have me seized by force or by stratagem, that I
    may be sent to France. I was warned last night by a friend of
    the Duke of Bedford, that the Count de Guerchy has not left
    a stone unturned to excite the duke’s wrath against me. This
    same person also warned me yesterday morning that at a council
    held at St. James’, the ministers had deliberated upon the
    means to be employed for arresting me and handing me over to
    France; but he could not tell me to what decision they had
    arrived. This, sir, is of the greatest consequence, and it is
    important that his Majesty should be good enough to order the
    Count de Guerchy to leave me in peace. I give you notice, most
    earnestly, that the first person who comes to my house, or
    attacks me in the street, will at once fall, no matter who he
    is, and I am quite indifferent as to the consequences. I again
    give you notice, that several leaders of the opposition send
    daily to see whether I am safe, and at the first attempt at
    violence against me, the embassy and all that it contains will
    be torn to pieces by what is here known as the mob, that is to
    say, the mariners and rabble from the city, who are at the call
    of the opposition. You are sensible of all the disasters about
    to take place. The Count de Guerchy ignores the whole of this;
    he is not bright enough to apprehend all that is going on,
    and even if he were, he would not report, but rather conceal
    from the King what he knew. You are aware that I have never
    deceived you; I should be loth to do so under such important
    and pressing circumstances, and I must not conceal from you,
    that if I am once taken, after having so long and carefully
    cautioned you, and the King affords no relief, in such a case
    I will no longer consider myself bound to preserve the secret,
    and shall be obliged, thus driven to extremities, to justify
    my conduct; a still greater misfortune than the firing of the
    French embassy by the people.’

[Sidenote: THE PERSECUTING DUKE DE PRASLIN.]

These resolute letters had their consequences. M. Nort was hurried
off to London with the King’s secret instructions, taking with him a
conciliatory letter from the Count de Broglio, a sum of money for D’Eon,
and special directions to effect an arrangement, if possible, between the
ambassador and the turbulent captain of dragoons.[176] De Praslin, on
his part, had sent his own agent to England, with orders to take D’Eon
_alive_, above everything, it being his intention to confine him when
secured, in the Bastille.[177] ‘You must admit that his private letters
are deserving of this,’ said Louis XV. to Tercier; ‘but it is more
essential that he should be conciliated and my papers recovered.’




CHAPTER IX.

    D’Eon’s intricate situation—Popular indignation in England at
    the late peace—Letter of gratitude to Louis XV.; of reproach
    to the Count de Broglio—Sued for libel—Retains the King’s
    papers as security for his person—Illegal proceedings on the
    part of the French ambassador—Out of door precautions against
    being kidnapped—English sympathy for D’Eon—Is found guilty of
    libel, absconds, is searched after, and outlawed—Confession of
    Treyssac de Vergy—De Guerchy’s charge against de Vergy.


We may well pause awhile to recapitulate, and realise the parts that
were being severally played by King, minister, ambassador, and late
minister plenipotentiary, in this most extraordinary political drama.
In the first place we see the late minister plenipotentiary as the
custodian, not only of the King of France’s written secret instructions
and correspondence, extending over a series of years, but also of highly
compromising documents, the property of his Majesty,[178] of which, had
their signification been known to the people of England, still agitated
and discontented at the terms of the late peace, would inevitably have
plunged the two countries in afresh and sudden war. Then we find the
French Minister for Foreign Affairs, the willing instrument of the
King’s malicious mistress, employing his old friend, the ambassador in
London, to carry out her bidding by seeking to obtain the whole of the
plenipotentiary’s papers, first by authoritatively demanding them, then
by gentle measures, and afterwards at any hazard. The plenipotentiary
and King’s secret agent proves true to his trust in refusing to make any
surrender, without the express orders of his sovereign, whose secret
commands to that effect he holds. Of this the Minister for Foreign
Affairs knows nothing. The plenipotentiary cannot serve two masters,
and elects to submit himself to the King’s will, of which he alone
is cognisant. For refusing to yield to his superiors in office he is
regarded as a rebel, then a traitor, is degraded, disgraced, and to be
treated as if he were a common criminal, and this through orders wrested
from the King by his minister! Thus Louis XV., a cowardly stranger
to every emotion of the heart, suffers his name to be used as the
authority for dishonouring the most faithful of his servants, and because
apprehensive of the fate of his papers, and fancying he is no longer able
to protect the custodian of them, secretly puts him on his guard, and
although he recommends him to save himself if he can, remains carelessly
indifferent to what might befall him; turns to his ambassador, admits him
into the secret as the sole alternative that presents itself for ensuring
himself from being compromised, directs him to secure the papers, to
keep their existence and his possession of them a profound secret, and
retain them until such time as he shall return to France, when he is to
deliver them in person; this ambassador being the very man who, from the
beginning, was the confidant and tool of de Pompadour and de Praslin, and
against whose acquisition of the royal documents the plenipotentiary had
long and successfully struggled, braving the hostility of ministers until
he had effected his own ruin.

Had D’Eon been so inclined he might, solitary outcast as he was, have
constituted himself master of the situation, and dictated his own terms.
Offers amounting to forty thousand pounds were now made, if he would say
what he knew regarding the late peace. Lords Bute, Egremont, and Halifax,
the Duke of Richmond, Count Viri, and even the Princess of Wales, were
accused, in the general excitement, of having received bribes from the
French Court for their share in the negotiations; so great indeed was
the popular indignation against the Duke of Bedford, who had conducted
them at Versailles as the King’s ambassador, that he seldom dared to
appear in the streets of London, where he had been hissed, and worse
might have befallen him. It was believed, and with good reason, that the
Chevalier D’Eon was in a position to settle any doubts on the matter, and
it was sought to take advantage of his abandoned and penniless situation
by tempting him with plenty; but the love of lucre was not a trait in
the Chevalier’s character. ‘I am intractable as regards my honour,’ he
wrote more than once; and even though his royal master, for whom he was
enduring all things, should forsake him in time of greatest need, he
loved his country too well to expose it to danger and to the scorn of the
world, by betraying the King.

No sooner had the Chevalier received from M. Nort the Count de Broglio’s
letter and substantial succour from the King—for it should be remembered
that his emoluments and pension were stopped—than, brimful of emotion,
and believing that in this material assistance he saw fresh earnest
of interest in his behalf on the part of the monarch, now no longer
trammelled by de Pompadour,[179] he expressed his heartfelt gratitude in
these words:—

    ‘Sire,—I am innocent, and have been condemned by your
    ministers; but from the moment that your Majesty wishes it, I
    place my life, and the recollection of every outrage I have
    experienced from the Count de Guerchy, at your Majesty’s feet.
    Be persuaded, Sire, that I will die your faithful subject....’

His behaviour was very different towards the Count de Broglio, in whose
letter he found no reference whatever to his contentions with de Guerchy;
his solicitations for redress against the injuries he had suffered at
the hands of the ambassador remained unheeded, nor was there one word of
encouragement that might be construed into probable consideration of the
services he had rendered, privately to the King, and to his country. It
simply contained a proposition that he should surrender the papers in his
possession for a sum of money not stated, and as to his prospects in the
future, they were left undetermined. He returned the count’s letter to
Nort, under cover of a written declaration that he refused to consider it.

    ‘I gave him to understand that I was not being dealt with
    fairly, that the turn the count was pleased to give to my
    affairs, in connection with the King, was by no means agreeable
    to me, and not in the least in conformity with facts and with
    the consequences of the secret order of June 38, 1763, and
    secret instructions relating thereto, which had obliged me
    not to take my leave at an audience, but to remain in London.
    The count passes over, with inconceivable indifference, the
    complaints I have laid at the foot of the throne against M.
    de Guerchy, treating them as petty quarrels, money matters,
    delicate questions to arrange, when he conscientiously knew the
    contrary to be the case.... I was being innocently sacrificed
    to policy and expediency. The count was leaving me, like the
    goat in the fable, at the bottom of the well into which the
    King’s and his own political orders, and the mutual hatred of
    the Broglios and Guerchiens had cast me; but I was delighted to
    see him, like the fox, climb on to my shoulders to escape from
    exile, and out of the precipice in which I remained, awaiting
    with confidence and steadiness the pleasure of God and the
    King.’[180]

The French ambassador having been advised that the language employed
in the Introduction to the ‘Lettres, Mémoires,’ &c. was libellous,
immediately instituted proceedings against D’Eon, in which he was
supported by the whole diplomatic corps in London.[181] The trial[182]
was pending, and D’Eon, deserted and friendless, was careful to keep
himself armed at all points, so far as lay in his power, against the
coming struggle. He was satisfied that, provided he had custody of the
papers, he was comparatively safe from any very great harm. Nort had
brought to him no promise of protection, at a time that his liberty was
in hourly peril; he should therefore continue to keep the papers until
security of his person was guaranteed to him. Finding it impossible
to treat with the Chevalier, Nort returned to Paris from his bootless
errand, defeated and empty-handed.

    ‘Were you in my place,’ wrote D’Eon to de Broglio, ‘you would
    not do otherwise ... nothing in the world will induce me to
    give up these papers, so long as M. de Guerchy is ambassador
    in England. Should his Majesty determine upon appointing you,
    Monsieur le Comte, or the marshal, as ambassador, I can truly
    assert that considering the marshal’s great reputation in
    England, the affairs of France would at once take an entirely
    new direction. The action against me would break down, I should
    surrender my papers, and all would be well.’[183]

Apart from his action for libel, the ambassador caused yet another
pamphlet to be written and published by Goudard[184] (who wrote, says
D’Eon, _pro fame_ rather than _pro fama_), a vicious criticism on
the volume of ‘Lettres, Mémoires,’ &c. The Chevalier ‘would not take
the trouble to reply to this senseless rather than discriminating
disquisition on his book, but availed himself of the opportunity
afforded him on Easter Day, 1764, in chancing to meet Goudard in the
Green Park, St. James’, to give him a sound caning in the presence of
several respectable witnesses, to which the mercenary scribe never made
any answer;’ and Goudard having boasted in a coffee-house that he had
completely rebutted every argument advanced in the work, D’Eon gave out
that since he had thus proved the vigorous nature of his jaw, he should
borrow that ass’s jaw whenever he would have to combat _des Philistins
des Guerchiens et des chiens de Guerchy_.[185]

    ‘My enemies maintain that I am ambitious and delight in
    honours only, and this they say, because I became Minister
    Plenipotentiary at an early age without having sought the rank.
    The fact is, I have never nourished in my heart other than
    that noble emulation which spurs a man on to action. During
    my military and political career I have always aspired to the
    highest rank, without any idea of injuring anybody, and without
    feelings of envy or jealousy. The spirit of emulation is not
    forbidden by any law, Divine or human. The oak that reaches to
    the sky and raises its branches to the clouds, had once been
    but an acorn in the bowels of the earth. If the grass and the
    neighbouring small trees were to complain to Jupiter against
    this oak, would their murmurs be regarded? Thus should it be
    with those men who, born without common sense, unreasonably
    grudged me my elevation.’[186]

At the time of which we write, the trial of John Wilkes at the Old King’s
Court had already taken place, and the country was convulsed by what are
known as the Wilkes’ riots.

The Chevalier was increasing in popularity, ‘for it is engraven in the
hearts of the English to take part with the oppressed,’ at a time that de
Guerchy’s conduct was not of a nature to gain for him the esteem of the
ministers or people of England. He had come into disagreeable collision
with the authorities, and found pleasure in persecuting several of his
own countrymen in London,[187] who refused to be tyrannised over by him
in a manner that was offending the sensibilities of the liberty-loving
people amongst whom they lived, and especially at a time when that people
believed they were engaged in a struggle for liberty, represented in
their idol of the day—John Wilkes.

Some weeks previous to de Guerchy’s arrival, D’Eon wrote to apprise
him that he might rely upon exemption from duty in accordance with the
privileges of an ambassador, on all such goods as he might require to
pass into the country, provided it was indisputably shown that they were
for his sole use and benefit. The abuse of this privilege upon more
occasions than one, after his arrival in England, called forth a strong
remonstrance from the department concerned, to which de Guerchy replied
by the assertion of privilege; the matter was consequently referred to
the Lords of the Treasury, who terminated the discussion by informing
Lord Halifax that their lordships would not enter into the consideration
of all that had passed on the subject since his Excellency’s arrival,
although, if it were necessary, they could produce instances which would
be sufficient to convince his lordship that their officers were not to be
charged with any unusual strictness in their treatment of his Excellency;
neither would they enforce the necessity of the exact observance of
the laws, or the propriety of the orders lately given for the strict
execution of them, showing the many and notorious abuses which had been
committed under pretence of the privilege; for they were only desirous
to prevent the evil for the future, and not to complain of what was
past.[188]

[Sidenote: FRENCH AMBASSADOR’S ABUSE OF PRIVILEGE.]

Upon another occasion, three constables were sent to the French Embassy
to arrest the ambassador’s ‘gentleman of the horse,’ for having
threatened the life of a woman and to set her house on fire, when the
ambassador caused the gate to be closed, his servants assaulted the
constables and confined them, and he himself tore up the warrant they
presented. This outrage was followed up by de Guerchy’s complaint of
the violation of the privileges of an ambassador, in the attempt to
arrest his _écuyer_ within the court-yard of his Excellency’s house. The
law officers of the Crown having been consulted, the Foreign Secretary
informed the King’s ambassador at the French Court that—

    ‘the Attorney-General was doubtful whether the ambassador’s
    privileges had been violated, but it was clear that his
    Excellency’s conduct in the transaction had been highly
    improper and illegal.’[189]

It was George III.’s birthday (June 4), and de Guerchy being recognised
in the streets was insulted, and the windows of the Embassy were broken.

    ‘M. de Guerchy maintains that it is I who excited the people,
    because they rather like me, and publicly drink my health and
    that of Wilkes. Nothing is more false.’[190]

Writing to Tercier upon these events, D’Eon says:—

    ‘De Guerchy has written to tell his friend (de Praslin) that
    I have threatened to thrust him out of the sanctuary afforded
    him by the embassy, which he profanes. This is absolutely
    false, but were it even true, is it not still more true that
    he has openly violated the dignity of the position confided
    to him by the King—(1) in causing a detachment of grenadiers
    to be summoned to arrest me, a minister of France, and in
    whose house? In that of the minister of the King of England.
    (2) In causing me to be poisoned, two days later, at his own
    table, to which he had invited me; (3) in wishing to pass me
    off for a lunatic; (4) in converting the embassy into a store
    for contraband goods. If our Lord chastised the Scribes and
    Pharisees, if He scourged the dealers out of the temple, if
    our holy father the Pope justly fulminates against the enemies
    and profaners of things sacred, does not de Guerchy deserve to
    be driven back all the way to Dover at a gallop, with a whip
    made of ass’s hide? I have read in the papers that the King has
    sent into the Gévaudan M. Antoine with a good pack of harriers
    to take the wild beast of Gévaudan.[191] I entreat you to
    represent to him that it would be worthy of his good heart to
    send hither a second M. Antoine, with a good pack of hounds,
    to drive out of England the Count de Guerchy, a thousand times
    more cruel and more dangerous than the monster of Gévaudan.
    Indeed, I cannot conceive how it is that the English, who have
    destroyed all the wolves in England, suffer this new man-wolf
    to exist in their midst.’[192]

[Sidenote: IN DANGER OF BEING KIDNAPPED.]

The spies and officers of police sent by the French minister and acting
under the directions of de Guerchy, continued to watch every movement
of the Chevalier, who they no doubt still hoped to kidnap, as had been
the Marquis de Fratteau[193] some years previously. Five were lodged in
Gerrard Street, close to Brewer Street, where he resided. His precautions
he describes to an old friend, Captain Pommard, in Paris. When he
went out, as he did daily, it was with all the vigilance a captain of
dragoons should observe in time of war. His own spies were about. He
had met his enemies, and had any attempt been made against his person,
they would have been cut to pieces by the party he led. Every evening
he reconnoitred at Ranelagh and Vauxhall; but acts of violence were not
to be apprehended in England, and he was more on his guard against the
stratagems of those with whom he was unacquainted, and of his false and
therefore dangerous friends. That French emissaries were actually on
the look-out to seize the Chevalier and carry him off to France in a
vessel appointed for the purpose, does not appear to have been generally
credited in London, judging by the obituary notices which appeared in the
newspapers, where it is stated that if the Chevalier was not the author
of the reports to that effect, he at any rate believed in them.[194]
Were official confirmation of the plan for his abduction needed, it is to
be found in de Guerchy’s handwriting, and in the instructions he asks,
under date June 23, 1764, as to whether D’Eon is to be seized before or
after his trial for libel.

The Chevalier’s case met with a good deal of sympathy, which found its
way into the papers, and exhibited itself in anonymous letters cautioning
him to be wary against his countrymen. His unknown correspondents
recommended him to withdraw to Oxford, Bath, or other distant town,
taking care not to allow even his most discreet friend to know the time
of his departure or his destination.

    ‘... The people are already agitated, and favourably, in
    your behalf, and the greater the agitation the more will the
    people be on the _qui vive_ to protect you against any kind of
    abduction, by stratagem or by force. Even the ministry will be
    obliged, in the interests of the public, to watch against any
    such attempts as are contrary to the rights of persons and the
    laws of the country....’

He should not leave his house unless accompanied by some trustworthy
person who spoke English and knew London well, and he should never think
of going out at night.... Were any scoundrel sufficiently rash and
villainous to dare to attack him, he should pitilessly shoot him or cut
him in two with his sword.[195] That the Chevalier would have killed the
first man who dared to lay hands upon him was no bombast on his part. He
had written to Lord Mansfield, to the Earl of Bute, Mr. Pitt, and Earl
Temple, to represent what were the designs of the French ambassador, the
risk he hourly incurred of being kidnapped, and to seek their advice. He
informed Lord Mansfield that he did not contract any debts, and avoided
everything that could possibly lead him to an infringement of the laws.
If, therefore, the law would appear to arm itself against his liberty,
he must necessarily conclude it did so under a false pretence, being won
over by the hatred of his enemies to deliver him to them. Such being the
case, might he presume to ask his lordship, he who was the administrator
of those laws which but interpreted primitive and natural laws, might he
presume to inquire whether the necessity for self-defence did not place
him in the position of repelling force by force? He ventured to think
that his lordship’s heart contemplated such extreme measures with dread;
but his equity, as was natural, would readily forgive any evils resulting
therefrom. Such was his position, which he was obliged to bring to
notice, in the hope that his lordship’s equity would offer some counsel
that he was able to follow, and which should be equally in conformity
with the requirements for his safety and with the laws of a country he
loved and to which he owed so much.

[Sidenote: TRIAL FOR LIBEL.]

Towards the end of June, the Chevalier received notice of the charges
upon which he was to be tried, and a summons to appear on July 9,
that being the end of Trinity term. He made an affidavit asking for
adjournment to another term, to enable him to produce four witnesses who
had been expelled the country by orders of the French ambassador. His
application was refused, and it being simply impossible for his counsel,
who knew nothing of French, to read and digest in the course of eight
days his book of six hundred pages in quarto, he made up his mind not
to appear. The trial came on before Lord Chief Justice Mansfield at the
King’s Bench bar on the day appointed, upon information filed against
him by the King’s command, as author of a libel on the Count de Guerchy,
and in default was found guilty.[196]

D’Eon disappeared, and although not readily found, was by no means idle,
for in this same month, July, the Marquis de Blosset, in diplomatic
charge during de Guerchy’s absence on leave,[197] made application to
Lord Halifax that the Chevalier might be compelled to cease printing
certain papers which he believed to be the ‘Négotiations,’ in which his
cousin, D’Eon de Mouloise, and M. la Rochette were also concerned. The
English minister replied that it was impossible to stop the printing of
books when the subject was not known, and on suspicion only;[198] and
here the matter dropped. After a time, a clue having been obtained to the
Chevalier’s place of concealment, the Solicitor-General was consulted
on the legality of force being employed for arresting him and bringing
him to the bar of the Court of King’s Bench to receive sentence upon the
conviction. Sir Henry Norton gave it as his opinion that the officer
having the paper process of the Court of King’s Bench for apprehending
the Chevalier D’Eon, was thereby authorised and might legally break open
the doors of a house though within the verge of the Court or of any other
house, in order to take the Chevalier, if, upon request, the doors of
such house should be refused to be opened; and it being believed that the
house in which D’Eon was secreted stood within the verge of the Court,
the Solicitor-General ruled that any objection on that account might be
easily obviated by a proper application for the purpose.[199] No time
was lost, and on the evening of the same day, November 20, a house in
Scotland Yard, Whitehall, occupied by a Mr. Eddowes, was entered by an
officer and five men, who said they had come with orders to seek and
arrest, or take, dead or alive, the Chevalier D’Eon. They spent an hour
on the premises, bursting open every door, not excepting even that of
the room in which Mr. Eddowes, many years bed-ridden, was lying; and
they were about to force open a closet and bureau, but that Mrs. Eddowes
cautioned them against so doing, as the room contained papers and money
belonging to the King. D’Eon was nowhere about the house, and she had not
seen him for more than two months. The officer, whose conduct had been
outrageous, then left with the search party.[200]

[Sidenote: OUTLAWED.]

Having absconded from justice and failed to surrender himself to the
Court of King’s Bench to receive judgment, the Chevalier was in due
course, that is to say, on June 13, 1765, declared to be outlawed by
judgement of the coroners for the county of Middlesex.[201]

The story must go back a few pages, that we may become the better
acquainted with Treyssac de Vergy with whom we parted at the door of
D’Eon’s back premises, through which he was ignominiously made to pass on
the morning of October 27, 1763, when he had presented himself to settle
an affair of honour pending between himself and the Chevalier. Whatever
the latter’s hiding-place for several months after his conviction, it is
very certain that de Vergy found him out the following September, and
to his great astonishment favoured him one day with a call. Smitten with
remorse and driven by despair, de Vergy had a confession to make which
throws all the light needed on the designs of the triumvirate at Paris
against the liberty and life even of the Chevalier D’Eon.

    ‘You must be surprised, sir, at this visit,—D’Eon admitted
    he was, greatly so—‘but when you are acquainted with the
    reason for it, I hope I shall regain in your estimation some
    of the respect I justly forfeited upon the occasion of our
    last interview. I am a miserable wretch, and you will greatly
    despise me for all I am about to say, unless you give me credit
    for the remorse I feel and the heroic repentance which compels
    me to speak. May my latest acts make amends for the past!’

[Sidenote: BLOOD-THIRSTY MINISTERS.]

De Vergy then placed before the Chevalier the necessary papers to prove
his identity, as he promised he should do in the declaration he had
signed when they last met. He described himself as being a man of good
birth, an advocate of the parliament of Bordeaux, and son-in-law to the
Baroness Fagan; but having squandered his own and his wife’s fortune
in riotous living, had tried his hand at literature, and published, in
1762, a work entitled ‘Les Usages,’ which brought him into favour with
the Count d’Argental, not altogether, perhaps, the most desirable of
patrons; still, he was an intimate friend of de Praslin, and as de Vergy
was a candidate for any employment he could get, his friends advised him
to stick to the count, since he had chanced to please him. De Vergy did
so, and asked for his interest with de Praslin to obtain a nomination
as consul or secretary of Embassy, which resulted in an introduction to
de Guerchy, the new ambassador to London, through whom he was informed
he might possibly obtain the secretaryship of Embassy, in the room of
D’Eon, who had given displeasure at Court. De Guerchy referred him to
d’Argental, and the latter, in a somewhat long interview they had, told
de Vergy that he might have to pay for such an appointment, in case of
need, with personal courage and blind devotion to the orders of the Count
de Guerchy.

    ‘I have made myself responsible to M. de Guerchy for your
    discretion, and have assured him that you will fall in with his
    views, and that you will serve him as readily with your sword
    as with your pen, according to circumstances.’

    ‘I cannot understand that a secretary of Embassy need resort to
    the first.’

    ‘You do not know but that you may find yourself in a position
    to have to do so.’

    ‘I do not understand this mystery; pray, sir, explain yourself.’

    ‘Do you know D’Eon?’

    ‘No, sir.’

    ‘They are displeased with him at Court.’

    ‘Am I to be specially instructed on this point?’

    ‘He must be ruined.’

    ‘But is he not already ruined, since he has incurred
    displeasure at Court?’

    ‘It is not this ... it is something else....’

    ‘I do not understand you.’

    ‘It is necessary that he should commit himself so seriously....’

    ‘But how is this to be managed?’

    ‘I cannot say.’

    ‘I think, sir, you should express yourself more clearly.’

    ‘I thought you understood me.’

    ‘It is really difficult to do so.’

    ‘Well, then, M. de Guerchy is under orders to bring D’Eon into
    disgrace; but a stranger and a skilful hand must do this.’

    ‘Do you mean to say, sir, that the man about to replace him
    should commit a base action?’

    ‘I do not mean anything; you misunderstand me....’ An awkward
    silence of some moments ensued, and the count, rising from
    his chair and steadily eyeing de Vergy, said, ‘I was under the
    impression, de Vergy, that you were ambitious, and that you
    were to be relied upon.’

    ‘You are not mistaken, sir, but I cannot stray from what I owe
    to honour and to my name.’

    ‘But you are not required to do anything wrong, only lend
    yourself to whatever may arise, and take honourable advantage
    of it. Go to London, await there the ambassador, and see him
    when he arrives. The secretaryship is yours, but you will have
    to make yourself worthy of it. You are clever, and I have
    explained myself.’

De Vergy went on to say that he was persuaded from this ambiguous
language and the few words de Guerchy had said to him, that he was
required to take part in some machinations, but to what end he could
not conceive. He explained his dilemma to d’Argental, who put him at
his ease by assuring him that he had nothing to fear, and as he was
literally starving, he overcame his scruples and consented to leave
for England where he preceded de Guerchy by several weeks. He was to
assist in encompassing the ruin of D’Eon, and through him of the Count
de Broglio; he was to spread reports injurious to the Chevalier’s
reputation; if possible, to pick a quarrel with him, and write a pamphlet
to his prejudice. It was thus that advantage was to be taken of his
necessitous situation. It was his conscience, not his courage, that made
him wince whilst doing the will of the ambassador, and when he had said
to the Chevalier the evening they met at the Embassy, _You do not know
the fate that awaits you in France_, it was his conscience that spoke
and would warn him, and had the Chevalier replied in an encouraging and
conciliatory manner, de Vergy would have confessed all to him. But he was
depending upon the Count de Guerchy for his very existence.

    ‘At five-and-twenty,’ he said, ‘the stomach is an integral part
    of the conscience. It has a deliberative voice in its internal
    decisions, and when to its sharp cry is added the hoarse and
    hollow sound from the bowels, their voices united generally
    have the preponderance.’

[Sidenote: DE VERGY’S CONFESSION.]

‘I could not help laughing,’ notes D’Eon, ‘at this theory in explanation
of the verdict of our conscience, and de Vergy laughed quite as heartily.’

    ‘The more pliable to his will did the ambassador find me,’
    continued de Vergy, ‘the more exacting did he become. After
    having in vain attempted many things against you, even to
    poisoning (for let me tell you, sir, that you were poisoned
    with opium; I know it from the ambassador himself, and I
    now tell you so), it was proposed that I should waylay and
    assassinate you. This infamous proposition was made to me at
    a moment when all the money I had borrowed for my current
    expenses was exhausted, and not having as yet received
    anything from the ambassador, I was in the greatest distress.
    I had given promissory notes to my landlord for lodging and
    board since my arrival in London, notes I hoped to meet with
    the salary I expected to receive. Their term had expired,
    and unless the money was forthcoming I was in danger of
    imprisonment. The Count de Guerchy knew this, and offered me a
    purse with one hand, and with the other—a dagger. I rejected
    the purse and the dagger. I am a wretch, a villain if you
    will, but not an assassin. In a few days I was arrested and
    imprisoned for debt. In vain did I appeal to him who made me
    leave France and attach myself to his service. My entreaties
    and my threats were equally powerless. The first he rejected
    because he made sure of your being carried off by the men sent
    for the purpose, and I could therefore no longer be of use to
    him; he scorned the latter, because I was in confinement and
    precluded from doing him harm. But if I could no longer see
    and speak to him, I was at least free to write, and I did so.
    Having heard of the action against you, I prepared, whilst in
    prison, a “Lettre aux Français”[202] in your vindication. The
    printing of it was secretly undertaken by Haberkorn of Grafton
    Street, when a fellow-prisoner betrayed me. My manuscript was
    taken from the printer in virtue of an order from the Chevalier
    Norton, and your judge, Lord Mansfield. A warrant was issued
    for my removal to Newgate, where I should have found myself
    amongst thieves and murderers; but thanks to the assistance
    of my relatives and friends I obtained my liberty, and the
    first use I make of it is to place myself at your service. The
    Count de Guerchy has broken the engagements by which he was in
    honour bound to me, and released me from mine. His Excellency
    has dared to summon you before the tribunals; make any use you
    please in self-defence of the disclosures I have made. I am
    at your disposal. I will admit my own faults, and prove your
    innocence in London, Paris, or Versailles, over the whole earth
    if necessary. Happy, indeed, shall I be to make reparation, by
    some little good, for a part of the injury I have caused you!’

    ‘Are you prepared,’ inquired D’Eon, deeply impressed by these
    revelations, ‘to affirm and attach your signature to all you
    have been saying to me?’

    ‘I am prepared to affirm the same, before God and man, to sign
    with my hand and seal with my blood.’

    ‘Very well, M. de Vergy. Do you recollect my last words to you
    on October 27, 1763. “If you prove to me that you are an honest
    man, I will be the best of your friends.” You have given me
    this proof, and henceforth I will keep my word.’ D’Eon took his
    hand, and the young man’s eyes filled with tears.

    ‘My friends wish me to return to Paris; I have no means of
    existence in London, but I will get on as best I can, and
    remain with you until the time of your trial.’

    ‘Be it so. You shall share my bread with me.’

Indeed, D’Eon had nothing but a piece of bread to offer, being himself in
sore need; a refugee from the world![203]

[Sidenote: CHARGES AGAINST DE VERGY.]

Whilst preparing his ‘Lettre aux Français’ for the press, de Vergy
enclosed extracts to de Guerchy, and threatened its immediate publication
unless his Excellency would consent to buy it off by sending him the sum
of eighty guineas and granting him some other favours, and he employed an
attorney named Grojan to call at the Embassy, receive the money, and give
a receipt for it. Such, at least, was de Guerchy’s statement, eventually
unsupported as will appear in the sequel; but this circumstance being
brought to the notice of Lord Halifax, the matter was placed in the
hands of the Solicitor-General, by whom it was submitted that de
Vergy’s attempt to extort money from the French ambassador by threats
and vilifying his Excellency and his Court if his demands were not
complied with, was highly criminal, and he might be legally prosecuted
for the same, either by indictment or by information in the name of his
Majesty’s Attorney-General, and if convicted upon the trial would be
brought to condign punishment. Lord Halifax immediately instructed the
Attorney-General to prosecute M. de Vergy by way of information in his
name, and at the expense of the King, giving at the same time notice to
this effect to the French ambassador.[204] Actions for libel, however,
were of such ordinary occurrence at this period of social disorder, that
as many as two hundred informations were filed against printers and
others in the course of the year.




CHAPTER X.

    D’Eon challenges the French ambassador—Institutes legal
    proceedings against him—Strong appeal to the Count de
    Broglio and indifference of the latter—De Guerchy _v._
    De Vergy—De Vergy’s affidavits—Secret correspondence in
    danger—Undignified conduct of Louis XV., who ‘feels he is in
    a mess’—True bill against the French ambassador for inciting
    to murder—D’Eon’s disregard of his King’s intervention—De
    Guerchy applies for a _nolle prosequi_—Attorney-General refuses
    a certificate—Miscarriage of justice, and state of public
    feeling—Count de Broglio’s conciliatory proposals—A royal
    pension conferred on D’Eon—De Broglio’s advice—D’Eon surrenders
    his secret orders from the King.


Provided with de Vergy’s statement in writing and bearing his signature,
the first step taken by the Chevalier was to call upon de Guerchy to
settle their differences by recourse to arms, as became two soldiers.
The latter objected to draw swords with a fencing-master. The Chevalier
observed he was right, and proposed, to ensure perfect equality, that
the ambassador should choose his own fire-arms and they should fight
on horse-back, if he objected to do so on foot; and further intimated
to him, through his seconds, that if he promised to meet him on the
ground with a good grace, he gave his word of honour, privately, that
he should wound him only; whereas de Guerchy would be at liberty to do
his worst. The count’s reply to this was that D’Eon must be a fool to
suppose a general would agree to fight a simple captain of dragoons,
which persuaded the Chevalier that it would be as impossible for such
a man to perform an act of courage and of justice, as it is to extract
oil from stones. De Guerchy could not be prevailed upon to fight! Then,
‘out of consideration for the Court of France and for the count’s family,
D’Eon was careful to lay at the feet of his august master his private
wrongs on the subject of poisoning, assassination, kidnapping, and other
not generally known dark designs against his honour, his life, his
person, and his papers. This he did before appealing to the tribunals of
England for that liberty and the safety of his person and papers which
the law could ensure to him.’ It does not appear that Louis XV. took
any notice of these representations, and D’Eon determined on having de
Guerchy prosecuted for a craven-hearted criminal, and he took proceedings
accordingly.

[Sidenote: PROSECUTION OF THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR.]

A copy of de Vergy’s deposition was sent to the Duke de Choiseul, and
another to the Count de Broglio under cover of one of the most pitiful of
appeals.

                                          ‘London, November 2, 1764.

    ‘Sir,—I have the honour to enclose for your sole information,

        ‘The[205] horrible plot is at last disclosed. I can
        now say to M. de Guerchy what the Prince de

    copy of my last letter to the Duke de Choiseul, and of that

        Conti said to the Marshal de Luxembourg before the
        battle of Steenkerque: “Sangaride! this is a great

    of M. de Montmorin, Bishop of Langres, who is intimately
    acquainted

        day for you my cousin! You will be a fine fellow if
        you get out of the mess!” None are more concerned

    with my family, and has known me since childhood.

        than you and the marshal, in employing all means for
        protecting yourselves against the

    He is good enough to employ his interest in my behalf with the

        enemies of your house. The King cannot but be
        persuaded now of the truth; it is as clear as
        daylight.

    Dauphin, who has great regard for him. I am aware that the

        I am taking my own measures. I have informed the Duke
        of York and his brothers of the

    Bishop of Langres is a strong partisan of the marshal; you may

        truth and atrociousness of the conspiracy against
        you, the Marshal de Broglio, and myself. They will

    therefore, sir, recommend my case to the Bishop with perfect

        inform the King, the Queen, and the Princess of
        Wales. M. de Guerchy, who has been unfavourably

    safety, and he will be delighted to support your good-will in my

        received since his return,[206] is disturbed beyond
        conception, notwithstanding his audacity, and I know

    behalf. I have the honour to be, with profound respect,

        that the King of England is disposed to be just
        towards the marshal and myself. Do your part, do

                                  Sir,

        something and do not desert me as you seem to be
        doing. I will defend myself to the last drop of my

                           Your most humble,

        blood, and fearlessly serve your house in spite of
        you! You desert me! You send me no money,

                       and most obedient servant,

        whereas I am struggling in your behalf. Do not desert
        me and do not drive me to despair. Send me

                                                             D’EON.’

        sufficient money to enable me to fight your battles
        and mine, unless you wish to be crushed under the
        weight of injustice. I have expended more than twelve
        hundred pounds in carrying on my war, and you send me
        nothing. It is abominable, and allow me to say that I
        should never have believed it!’[207]

A long time had elapsed since the date of de Broglio’s last letter to
the Chevalier, and now his reply was laconic enough. He declined, in
the future, to submit to the King any of his letters in which allusion
was made to de Guerchy, but he would take extracts and show them to his
Majesty. D’Eon remained puzzled at this system of neutrality, having
noticed that the very dispatches which informed him that any reference
he might make to his squabbles with de Guerchy should not be seen by
the King, were approved with the own hand of the sovereign, who must
consequently have been aware of the correspondence on this particular
subject being concealed from him.

[Sidenote: QUALMS OF CONSCIENCE.]

The reports on the threatening attitude assumed by D’Eon and the probable
use he would make of de Vergy’s deposition, caused no little alarm in
the mind of de Guerchy and at the French Court. It became a matter of
greater moment than ever to the ambassador that he should rid himself
of the hateful Chevalier, and he urged upon Lord Halifax, in pressing
terms, that de Vergy, who was making common cause with D’Eon, should be
prosecuted as his lordship stated might be done. To his old friend de
Praslin he represented that nothing in D’Eon’s past villainous conduct
could be compared to his latest fabrications, which were enough to make
one shudder. De Praslin (?) and de Choiseul were so firmly persuaded of
de Vergy’s criminality, that they angrily complained to Lord Hertford of
the difficulty de Guerchy and they experienced in obtaining justice in
England; to which they received assurances that the measures pursued and
pursuing against D’Eon and de Vergy, were fully sufficient to repair the
insult offered to the King of France in the person of his representative;
but scarcely had this explanation been given than the impatient de
Guerchy, apprehensive and insecure, importuned the English minister
to take steps against de Vergy in accordance with the opinion of the
Attorney-General. This affair, however, eventually fell to the ground.
De Guerchy failed to make out his case, and was in the end informed by
Lord Halifax that the affidavits made did not suffice for entering an
action.[208]

De Vergy had, in the meantime, made other depositions upon oath, in which
he gave ‘a true and circumstantial account of the plot against the life
of the Chevalier D’Eon’—the one on November 12, before Judge Wilmot,
of the Court of King’s Bench; the other on November 27, before Judge
Yates, also of the Court of King’s Bench; and he sent a report of his
proceedings to the Duke de Choiseul, dated November 15.

    ‘... Last Monday, I made an affidavit at the King’s Bench
    against M. de Guerchy, and proved by his words and certain
    circumstances to which I swore, that he ordered me to
    assassinate M. D’Eon, assuring me that the opium he had caused
    to be given to him at dinner, on Friday, October 28, had had
    no effect. This circumstance was made known at the time by M.
    D’Eon’s complaint to his Excellency himself, that he had been
    poisoned at his table. In meeting this charge by saying that
    I am mad, that I have lost my senses, M. de Guerchy condemns
    himself, and if I am flattered at the compliment, believe, sir,
    in my regret at not being able to return it. I show myself in
    London publicly. I am to be seen everywhere, at the promenades,
    at the play, in coffee-houses; yet M. de Guerchy does not sue
    me before the law. Do you know, sir, the reason why? Because
    by the law of retaliation and English justice, M. de Guerchy
    not having it by any means in his power to convict me of making
    false statements, would have the honour of being sent to the
    pillory and transported, were he to accuse me of perjury.’[209]

De Guerchy’s hour of retribution was at hand, and the Chevalier was
satisfied. Louis XV., ever selfish and unconcerned, but ill concealed
his uneasiness at the serious aspect of affairs, and gladly approved of
the Count de Broglio’s offer to proceed to London and bring D’Eon to his
senses, to arrange with him for the surrender of the compromising papers,
and mediate between him and his tormentor. One difficulty presented
itself to the King, who asked Tercier: ‘On what plea is the despatch of
the Count de Broglio to England to be proposed to M. de Praslin?’—but
ere this new design could be matured it had to be abandoned, an awkward
incident that had the effect of seriously disturbing the King’s
equanimity, having well-nigh led to disclosures which would certainly
have unravelled the mystery of the long- and well-maintained secret.

[Sidenote: THE SECRET CORRESPONDENCE IN DANGER.]

D’Eon’s valet, a man named Hugonnet, had been for some time employed
carrying despatches on the King’s secret service between the two
countries. Long suspected of being engaged in this duty, orders were
issued by the ministry to the police at Calais to watch for him, and
arrest him if they at any time found sufficient cause. On January 10,
as he was preparing to return to England, he was taken up, and in his
possession was found a letter in the handwriting of M. Drouet, private
secretary to the Count de Broglio. It was intended, ostensibly, for
D’Eon de Mouloise in London, bore no signature, but contained the names
of Tercier and Durand, and allusions to the Counsellor, the deputy,
&c. Drouet was in consequence also arrested and his papers seized, and
the two were lodged in the Bastille. Being kept promptly informed by
de Broglio of what was passing, and fearing that all was surely about
to be discovered, Louis XV. resorted to the only expedient left to
him—to secure the co-operation in his cause of the officials in charge
of the prisoners. He immediately sent for M. de Sartines,[210] officer
of police, and had to endure the humiliation of admitting him into his
confidence, and asking him to lay hold of all such papers as were likely
to compromise, in the sight of his ministers, those of his secret agents
he named.

    ‘I have unburdened myself and confided in him (de Sartines).
    He seemed pleased, and we must hope that his discretion and
    this mark of confidence will guide him aright. If we are
    disappointed, we will see what is to be done, and write to de
    Guerchy. Have your mind at ease.’

So wrote Louis XV. to Tercier; and again, in a day or two:—

    ‘I am afraid that we are getting into a mess. I have instructed
    M. de Sartines to send for you and see you secretly, and
    that you will give him the fullest particulars.... You cannot
    possibly be present at the investigation and the patching up
    of this business, but tell de Sartines everything, arrange
    matters with him, and let him make his report to me.... At the
    preliminary inquiry M. de Praslin said he treated them with
    contempt, but what passed between him and de Sartines should
    suffice to tranquillise you.... I am quite sure that Drouet is
    in a mess, but he will get out of it (I rather feel that I am
    getting somewhat into a mess).’[211]

[Sidenote: A PLAY AT THE BASTILLE!]

De Sartines found himself painfully embarrassed at the peculiar position
into which he was forced by the King, and showed no little diffidence and
hesitation in his action. ‘I find him a very timid man,’ was de Broglio’s
remark to the sovereign, ‘and yet I do not see what he has to fear,
having received his master’s orders.’ Louis XV. was little apprehensive
that the police officer would fail in his duty towards himself, for he
had already received from him a bundle of recovered papers. Fortunately
for the royal schemes in hand, de Praslin was at Versailles with the
Court, and although he had announced his intention of being present at
the examination of the prisoners, the day was not fixed. Advantage was
taken of this respite by the sneaking monarch to corrupt yet another of
his officials, so urgent was he in seeking to lift, at least his own
self, out of the mire. His Majesty authorised M. Jumilhac, Governor of
the Bastille, to admit Tercier to a conference with Drouet and Hugonnet,
thereby requiring him to violate his trust! Every precaution was to be
taken that Tercier might enter and leave the prison unnoticed, for fear
that some busybody should carry the tale to the ministers. De Broglio was
to appoint to each actor in the farce about to be played his part for
misleading de Praslin. Drouet was to declare that he had been acting
on his own responsibility and to oblige a friend; Hugonnet would insist
that he was employed by Drouet, and by him alone, without reference to
any other person; the titles had reference to certain friends of D’Eon;
and, finally, de Sartines was to countenance these fanciful declarations
and not conduct too searching an interrogatory. ‘I have been at work for
fifteen hours consecutively, wrote de Broglio to the King, ‘preparing
material for the investigation, the replies to be given by the Sieur
Drouet, the depositions to be made by Hugonnet, all of which will be in
keeping with what has already transpired, and I have prepared a sort of
interrogatory for M. de Sartines.’

‘They are playing the fool with me!’ said de Praslin to de Sartines,
peevishly, as he went away at the close of the investigation, and on
making his report the following day, Sunday, at a Cabinet Council, he
insisted that Drouet had not been telling the whole truth.

    ‘There is some truth in this!’ observed the King, in
    communicating de Praslin’s impressions to Tercier. ‘Drouet is
    to undergo another examination, and will be discharged from
    prison towards the end of this week. Hugonnet will be detained
    a little longer, but I hope we see the end. Everything went off
    well at the council, and there was no distrust. I did not think
    it desirable to order Drouet’s liberation, so as not to excite
    any suspicion.’[212]

Drouet did get away, having threatened to disclose everything if detained
in durance, and so he had nothing for which to thank the King whom, as
was the case with others, he was serving but too faithfully. Hugonnet’s
detention was a cruelly long one.

    ‘Could there be a greater act of despotism than that of
    detaining at the Bastille, for over a twelvemonth, the valet of
    the Chevalier D’Eon?... Guerchy had written to ask his friend
    Praslin to arrest Hugonnet; he distrained the effects the
    man had left behind, and refused to give them back until one
    hundred guineas had been paid to L’Escallier, his secretary;
    and further gave orders, that neither Hugonnet nor his wife
    should be allowed to attend the services at the chapel in the
    Embassy.’[213]

I have said that D’Eon was about to institute proceedings against the
French ambassador on a criminal charge. Those proceedings had commenced
and followed their course. De Guerchy was indicted on February 12, and on
March 1, following, a true bill was found against him by the grand jury
of Middlesex, at Hick’s Hall, for a conspiracy against the life of the
Chevalier D’Eon—a verdict that greatly perplexed the ministry; for, by
the law of England, a person accused upon oath of any criminal offence
must take his trial for the same when the bill of indictment is found
against him by a grand jury; but by the law of nations, ambassadors are
exempted from the ordinary forms of law in the countries where they are
resident. The most eminent lawyers had been consulted, but the decision
was left to the wisdom of the two courts.[214]

The Duke de Broglie asserts that ‘this audacious verdict was received
in London with a sort of stupor;’ but if the English papers of the day
are consulted, this will scarcely be found to have been the case, for
de Guerchy was by no means a favourite with the general public. At
Versailles, on the contrary, the sensation caused was immense. The Count
de Broglio and M. de Beauvau talked themselves hoarse one evening in
trying to make Hume[215] feel that, independently of the quality of the
accusers, and the little similarity in the depositions they had made,
it was inconceivable that an ambassador could be subjected to any other
jurisdiction than that of his own master. Hume kept repeating in reply
that the laws of England in this respect were immutable, and that the
authority of the King would not suffice to effect any alteration.[216]

[Sidenote: TRUE BILL AGAINST THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR.]

The Chevalier sought to improve the occasion by sending what may be
regarded as a note of intimidation:—

    ‘Considering the actual state of affairs, it is absolutely
    necessary that the arrangement[217] proposed by you should be
    at once concluded, and that you should be here without loss of
    time, say by the 20th of this month. This is the last letter
    I shall have the honour of writing to you on the subject of
    the poisoner, the villain Guerchy, who would have been broken
    alive on the wheel in France, did he meet with his deserts.
    But, thanks be to God, he will only be hanged in England, as
    was the case with Count de Sea in Cromwell’s time.... All the
    intriguing powers of France will not prevail in favour of
    Guerchy against the power of the laws of England, when their
    execution is confided to independent arbiters. I give you my
    word of honour, that very shortly Guerchy will be arrested as
    he leaves court, and taken to the prison for criminals in the
    city of London. His friend Praslin will come to deliver him, if
    he can; it is more likely that the friend to deliver him will
    be the executioner.’[218]

D’Eon was satisfied that his bitter enemy was in his power, and had made
up his mind that nothing should induce him to alter his determination
to run him to earth. ‘He should either triumph through the evidence in
favour of his innocence and the strength of the laws, or know how to bear
himself nobly on the scaffold.’

    ‘When my good Louis XV. asked me not to hunt his ambassador to
    death, and that, for the honour of France, he should not be
    hanged in London, I replied to my august master: “I am ready
    to obey you in all things but this, for I am bound, before God
    and man, to have him hanged for the salvation of France, and
    it would be the duty of a most Christian King to assist me to
    hook on, and not unhook off, the forked gibbet, a notorious
    poisoner. If, Sire, you had had the courage to hang those
    who poisoned the Dauphin and Dauphiness,[219] I should not
    have been poisoned in London, nor would many others have been
    poisoned at Versailles, Paris, and elsewhere.”’[220]

Writing to his son, in allusion to the subject that was engrossing the
mind of the public throughout the kingdom, the Earl of Chesterfield[221]
says:—

    ‘You inquire about M. de Guerchy’s affair, and I will give
    you as succinct an account as I can of so extraordinary and
    perplexed a transaction; but without giving you my opinion of
    it by the common post. You know what passed at first between
    M. de Guerchy and M. D’Eon, in which both our ministers and
    M. de Guerchy, from utter inexperience in business, puzzled
    themselves into disagreeable difficulties. About three or four
    months ago, M. de Vergy published in a _brochure_ a parcel
    of letters from himself to the Duke de Choiseul, in which
    he positively asserts that M. de Guerchy prevailed with him
    (Vergy) to come over into England to assassinate D’Eon. The
    words are, as well as I remember: ‘Que ce n’était pas pour se
    servir de sa Plume, mais de son Epée, qu’on le demandait en
    Angleterre.’[222]

Lord Chesterfield was wrong. De Vergy went to London to be secretary to
de Guerchy, and was desired, solicited, commanded to assassinate D’Eon,
not hired to do so, as the price for the appointment he coveted.

[Sidenote: FAIR ADMINISTRATION OF ENGLISH LAWS.]

The indictment against de Guerchy was afterwards, in Easter term, at the
instance of the Attorney-General, removed from the Old Bailey by writ of
_certiorari_ into the Court of King’s Bench. The ambassador applied to
the King for a _nolle prosequi_, and an order of reference was made to
the Attorney-General, Sir Fletcher Norton, and the Solicitor-General,
William de Grey, Esq., who issued summons on April 26, to the prosecutor
and his witnesses, to attend at Lincoln’s Inn at eight o’clock in the
evening of the following Tuesday, the 30th, to show cause why the _nolle
prosequi_ should not be granted; and upon hearing counsel on both
sides and witnesses, the proofs appeared so clear against de Guerchy,
that the Attorney-General refused to certify to the King in favour of
the ambassador or of a _nolle prosequi_, so that the indictment for
the intended murder of the Chevalier D’Eon, minister plenipotentiary,
undefended, undischarged, and open to further proceedings, remained on
record among the archives as a lasting monument of the villainous designs
of the French ambassador. A correspondent in a newspaper of the day
observed that the verdict ‘was a remarkable instance of the spirit of a
grand jury of the city of London, as well as of fair administration of
our laws.’[223]

    ‘Such a fact suffices of itself to characterise the justice and
    virtue of the young monarch and of his magistrates. No less
    honour is due to him than was due of old to Philip of Macedon,
    who, being besought by a courtier that his case should not
    be tried, very pertinently replied, that it was better the
    courtier should lose his suit than the King his reputation....
    Tiberius declared before the Senate one day, during the first
    ten years that he reigned with justice, and not with tyranny:
    _Nec utendum imperio, ubi legibus agi posset_—and that the
    pardon of great criminals was more insupportable than their
    crimes. Salvien declares that the punishment of persons of
    distinction should be the more severe, inasmuch that besides
    being criminals, they dishonour their blood. The code of
    Westphalia expressly decrees that persons enjoying dignities,
    or who have been raised to the magistracy, should be executed
    on a gibbet seven feet higher than others.’[224]

[Sidenote: THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR MOBBED.]

The London papers testify to the public discontent at this miscarriage of
justice, and when it became generally known that Chazal, the ambassador’s
butler, suspected by D’Eon of having administered opium to him by
direction of de Guerchy, at the Embassy dinner, had fled, leaving behind
him his youthful wife to whom he had just been married, the people no
longer hesitated to resort to violence. De Guerchy was mobbed whilst
out driving, and owed his safety simply to the declaration that he was
not indeed the French ambassador but only his secretary; the crowd
nevertheless followed the coach, and would have entered the court-yard
of the Embassy had not the iron gates been immediately closed. Failing
to reach his Excellency, the people somewhat relieved their feelings by
breaking every window they were able to reach with missiles from the
street.

To the storm succeeded a calm. De Guerchy, too glad to get out of the
way, proceeded on leave of absence, leaving in triumph the Chevalier, who
spent the summer at Byfleet[225] in Surrey, where he was a welcome guest
the chief part of the two succeeding years. When de Guerchy returned to
England in the autumn, he found his way to London without receiving any
of the honours that were strictly paid to the French King’s ambassadors.
Not a gun was fired, not a soldier was in attendance upon him, either at
Dover or at Canterbury.[226]

Meeting D’Eon one day, Lord Lincoln said to him: ‘How is it that
the Count de Guerchy has again returned to weary us with his sad
countenance?’ ‘Ma foi! my Lord, indeed I cannot say. He must be like a
top; the more it is whipped the better it goes!’[227]

At this juncture, de Broglio bethought him of making fresh proposals to
the Chevalier. He invited him to forget the past, to desist in the future
from all allusion to de Guerchy, whether for good or for evil—to forget
the action for libel—the trial for attempt to murder, &c. &c.; and upon
these conditions he should obtain the King’s sanction to entrust him
anew with the secret correspondence, whereby he would be required to
report on the state of public opinion in England, and what the members of
the opposition were about. This species of capitulation coming from no
less a person than the Count de Broglio, served to swell still more the
Chevalier’s sense of his own importance, and he replied:—

    ‘Your friendship for me is as great as my assurance in
    maintaining a secret correspondence in the position in which I
    happen to be. You risk nothing in enlisting my zeal, whereas I
    risk a great deal in following the natural inclinations of my
    inviolable fidelity to the sacred person of his Majesty. But it
    is as sad, as it is inconceivable, that you should forbid me,
    in the name of the King, to complain of having been poisoned.’

D’Eon concluded by insisting that de Guerchy should be permanently
recalled, and that in his stead should be appointed an ambassador to
whose hands he might confidingly entrust what he still held in his
charge.[228]

[Sidenote: TARDY JUSTICE.]

But even before de Broglio’s, had come a letter from Louis XV. D’Eon,
ever generous towards the shortcomings of the monarch he adored, thus
accounts for the King’s having refrained from any kind of interference or
expression of opinion during the period of his own grave strife with the
ambassador:—

    ‘I knew the man, and was not deceived in attributing this
    affected reserve to approbation that was not to be denied to
    me, but which was not either to be accorded to me. Louis XV.
    liked that his thoughts should be guessed. His silence was
    speech, it was necessary to know how to take it, and I was
    not long in finding out that I had conjectured rightly. On
    June 25, 1765, that is to say, some weeks after I had covered
    his ambassador in London with shame and infamy, his Majesty
    abruptly broke the silence he had been pleased to maintain for
    a time, and wrote to tell me that “he approved of my resuming
    and continuing with him my secret correspondence.” On November
    9 he sent word that he was “well pleased with me,” and on
    December 4 that I was “an instrument useful to my country.”
    These expressions of manifest satisfaction drew on one side, at
    last, the curtain that had so long concealed the royal thought.
    His Majesty crowned them with the greatest and most genuine
    testimony of his approbation, by sending to me soon afterwards
    the subjoined certificate, written entirely and signed with
    his own hand, and which will be for me and my family the most
    eloquent and precious memorial of my innocence and loyalty.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘As a reward for the services rendered to me by M. D’Eon in
    Russia, in my army, and in the execution of other trusts, I
    am pleased to bestow upon him a yearly allowance of twelve
    thousand livres, which I shall cause to be paid to him
    punctually at the expiration of every six months, wherever he
    may be, except in a country with which I am at war; and this
    until such time as I may think proper to nominate him to some
    post, the emoluments of which will greatly exceed the present
    allowance.

                                                            ‘LOUIS.’

    ‘Versailles, April 1, 1766.’

    ‘I, the undersigned, Minister Plenipotentiary of the King at
    this Court, hereby certify upon my honour and upon oath, that
    the above promise is really written and signed with the own
    hand of the King my master, whose orders I have received to
    deliver it to M. D’Eon.

                                                           ‘DURAND.’

    ‘London, July 11, 1766.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘With reference to this royal avowal,’ continues D’Eon, ‘the
    Count de Broglio wrote to me: “Your stay in England rendered
    necessary an extension of the King’s generosity. But you will
    perceive that the proof he has himself been pleased to give
    you, and which remains in your keeping, will for ever be to
    you a glorious title-deed.... When your mind is at rest, and
    the noise you have made and are still making in the world will
    have subsided, we will see to arranging some plan whereby your
    services may prove still more useful to your country and to the
    best of masters. Conduct yourself prudently and wisely; win
    over the prejudiced; do not be minister or captain of dragoons
    any longer; give up the romantic; assume the attitude and
    speech of a quiet and sensible man—thus, and in course of time,
    your talents will be remembered, your old friends will return
    to you, your enemies will forget you, and your master will find
    a subject worthy of serving him, and worthy of the benefits he
    has already conferred upon him. Like yourself, and even more
    than yourself, I have experienced reverses; I have felt that it
    was quite possible for a private individual to be sacrificed
    in the general vortex; I have never supposed that this would
    entail the principal misfortune, that of incurring the just
    displeasure of his Majesty. I have ever had confidence in his
    justice and goodness, and I am fortunate enough to experience
    the effects of this at present.... With an honest heart and a
    spirit a little daring, but not fierce or violent, one may hope
    to overcome the hatred and envy of the whole universe.”’[229]

D’Eon thanked the count for his friendly advice and good wishes, and took
occasion to remind him of the undertaking that the stipulated pension
should be paid with regularity; then, making up a sealed packet of the
papers in his possession, he entrusted them to the custody of his friend,
Mr. Cotes,[230] who unceasingly urged him to become a British subject,
and give up France, a country in which nobody was certain of sleeping in
his own bed.

Testimonials such as that received from the King, and his continued
employment in matters necessitating the greatest tact and circumspection,
should suffice to acquit the Chevalier of having been a half-witted
adventurer, as we find asserted by some writers. However impetuous, and
of almost ungovernable passions, D’Eon was not a fool, nor, in the course
of his history does it appear that any of his contemporaries seriously
thought him one, if we except the exasperated de Guerchy, who thus sought
to brand him, after having failed in his ‘blind authority,’ to ‘beat with
a staff the child that might have led him.’

Whilst D’Eon was receiving from the King of France the highest marks of
his royal confidence and favour, ministers at Versailles were officially,
but clandestinely, seeking to secure his person; and so late as November
1765, de Praslin, in conversation with the Duke of Richmond, the British
ambassador, remonstrated upon England not surrendering the Chevalier to
whom the Christian King had a hundred times a greater right, than had
England to John Rice, ‘a thief of the Publics,’[231] who was given up
by France. Ever watchful, D’Eon was perfectly conscious of all that was
passing.

    ‘These poor ministers have read somewhere, and have heard
    it said, that Cardinal Richelieu had caused several members
    of his ministry to be assassinated and poisoned, and yet,
    notwithstanding, posterity considered him a great man. They
    have imagined they might do likewise, and also be taken for
    great men, but one cannot deceive one’s self, there being
    nothing in common between them but the dagger and poison?’[232]

[Sidenote: A GRUMBLING FRENCH MINISTER.]

De Guerchy having quitted England ‘on leave,’ Durand succeeded him as
minister plenipotentiary, by royal warrant dated June 8. One of the
King’s old correspondents on secret service, Durand was well known to
D’Eon, with whom he had had frequent intercourse in former days. Recalled
from Poland by the Duke de Choiseul, who suspected him of being upon
intimate terms with the Count de Broglio, we now see him minister in
England, specially charged, though secretly, by the King, as had been de
la Rosière, Nardin, and Nort, to watch over and protect D’Eon. De Guerchy
was virtually superseded.

Durand was not long in coming to terms with D’Eon, upon whom he prevailed
to give up that most compromising of all papers, so far as the King
was personally concerned—His Majesty’s secret instructions of June 3,
1763,[233] and for which the Chevalier received, in exchange, the royal
warrant granting him an annual pension. Durand’s written report was as
follows:—

    ‘In compliance with the orders of the King, which I hold,
    M. D’Eon, late minister plenipotentiary from France at this
    court, has this day delivered into my own hands the private
    and secret order of the King, written and signed with his own
    hand, and dated June 3, 1763, addressed to the Sieur D’Eon. I
    further certify that the said order has been given to me in
    good condition, folded in a parchment cover addressed to his
    Majesty, and that it was shown to me enclosed and cemented
    within a brick adapted for the purpose, removed from the walls
    of the cellar and afterwards replaced.’




CHAPTER XI.

    D’Eon continues in the royal confidence—Secret correspondence
    again in peril—D’Eon’s mother persecuted—De Guerchy’s
    death—D’Eon’s last letter to him—De Vergy’s dying
    deposition—His will—D’Eon as secret correspondent—His public
    protest—The Musgrave scandal.


Once again was D’Eon admitted into the royal confidence—he had never
lost the royal favour—without any knowledge thereof on the part of the
King’s ministers, and this by means of the very representative they had
themselves nominated to the Court of Great Britain! A few weeks elapsed,
and there occurred an incident which seemed pregnant of import to the
Duke de Praslin, who put his whole heart into any action that had for
its object the pursuit of those rash enough to resist his authority. The
event proved to be of passing moment only, but merits notice as receiving
importance from the Chevalier’s subsequent history.

It was brought to the knowledge of the duke by a French woman named
Dufour who kept furnished apartments in London, that the Chevalier D’Eon
had been concealed for some days in her house, disguised as a female;
that he had been in the habit of corresponding with the Count and the
Marshal de Broglio, and receiving money from them. Upon being informed by
Tercier, in behalf of the King, of these fresh indications of a possible
exposure of their secret transactions, the Count de Broglio flew into a
violent passion, and was well-nigh making a clean breast of the matter
and admitting his share in them, regardless of all consequences. He
wrote to Tercier on October 22:—

    ‘It must be confessed that in executing the orders which it
    is the King’s pleasure to convey to us, we encounter the most
    unforeseen and embarrassing difficulties, but the secret we are
    keeping is his Majesty’s, and nothing is easier than to make it
    known, should he desire to do so. One word from him will put an
    end to the inquisitiveness of his ministers, inquisitiveness
    of which he not only knows the particulars, but also the
    motives. Well! supposing M. de Choiseul were to know to-morrow
    that we are in correspondence with D’Eon! Supposing he were to
    know that I have elaborated, by order of the King, a plan for
    the invasion of England, what else could happen but that his
    Majesty would forbid all reference to the subject? They would
    no doubt be jealous and uneasy at the confidence with which he
    would appear to honour us, but I see no harm in this.’

De Sartines had been directed by de Praslin to inquire into the
statements made by Dufour, saying, ‘Nothing essential is to be omitted
this time!’ The officer of police insisted that the woman was of very
doubtful reputation; no evidence, therefore, she was able to adduce could
be accepted, and before involving persons of so high consideration, as
were the de Broglios, in an affair of this kind, it would be necessary
to obtain a written order from the King that he himself, at least, might
be protected against all responsibility. Such pleas were worthy of a
poor perplexed detective, for since the Hugonnet business, de Sartines
felt himself bound, whatever his proper sense of duty, to consult, in
the first place, the sovereign’s private interests and obey his secret
commands, and he discerned, plainly enough, that the present was an
instance which called for the exercise of his utmost discretion and
prudence. Too well persuaded, on his part, of the futility of applying to
the King for the order suggested by the officer of police, de Praslin
had to content himself with a simple re-examination of Dufour, from
whom nothing more was to be learnt, and the summoning of Hugonnet, who
declared his incompetence to supply any kind of information, as the woman
was entirely unknown to him, nor had he ever heard of her. At the close
of the inquiry, de Praslin said: ‘I am not being duped, because, as a
fact, this affair causes me very little anxiety. It is not D’Eon who will
ruin the State.’[234]

[Sidenote: DEATH OF THE COUNT DE GUERCHY.]

Although de Guerchy and D’Eon had become separated never again to meet
on this earth; although their unprofitable bickerings had come to an
end and the time for recriminations was over, to cast each other into
oblivion was too impossible a task for either. Upon his return to France,
de Guerchy entered on a course of persecution, selecting for his victim
D’Eon’s aged mother, who was suddenly deprived of the enjoyment of
certain free tenures, while the taxes on her little estate at Tonnerre
where she was living in quiet retirement, were inordinately increased.
The poor lady was in fact hunted to misery and despair.

    ‘De Guerchy died at Paris in September 1767 in great anguish of
    body and mind. May our merciful God spare his soul in heaven,
    as I spared his body on earth!’[235]

D’Eon had sent the count a final challenge in the form of a letter, dated
August 5, 1767, which reached him a few weeks only before his death, when
his youthful son swore that he would some day avenge his father. This
letter, in which all the events of the past were recapitulated, covered
copies of the indictment, of the writ of _certiorari_, and of other
documents connected with his trial in London, and called upon de Guerchy
to justify himself.

    ‘Three weeks or one month from the date hereof should suffice
    to enable you to determine upon the line of conduct it is your
    intention to pursue. There are but two courses—justice, or an
    appeal to arms. Failing a reply at the expiration of the time
    stated, I will be persuaded of the hardness of your heart, and
    conclude that the world is to judge between us.’

No answer came, and D’Eon sent his letter to Amsterdam to be printed in
the form of a pamphlet by his friend Wan, the publisher. Whilst it was in
the press, Wan heard of de Guerchy’s death, and wrote (September 23) to
ask the Chevalier whether the publication was still to be proceeded with.
The reply was in the affirmative, because he owed a full and complete
justification to the King his master, to his country, to himself, to his
family, to his protectors, and to the position he had held in England.

    ‘The ashes of a dead man should not be disturbed, and I am
    aware that to recall him to memory for the sake of retracing
    his ignominy is the measure of barbarism; but if the evil he
    wrought has influenced to such an extent the misfortunes of one
    who has survived him, as to make it appear that his parched
    bones perpetuate them even out of the depths of the tomb,
    personal interest, which is the first law of nature, requires,
    however reluctantly, that the corpse should be summoned to
    appear before the tribunal of mankind, not for the purpose
    of being defamed, but that the survivor may justify himself
    against the reproach cast upon him. Did not the Egyptians, so
    reverential towards their dead, summon, judge, and condemn the
    manes even of their monarchs? Let the inevitable therefore be
    answerable for whatever is done against M. de Guerchy, though
    he be dead. Even in his grave he is guilty of the ills that are
    being endured. Had he made any reparation his death would have
    been respectfully considered, although his acts would have been
    abhorred.’[236]

_Hatred usually ends with the death of the one hated_, says Boccaccio;
it was not so, however, with D’Eon, who to the close of his days never
forgot, though he had long forgiven, the enemy that had been the cause of
all his troubles.

[Sidenote: AN UNWAVERING WITNESS.]

Treyssac de Vergy died at Blackheath in October 1774.[237] Two
magistrates, at the request of Sir John Fielding, attended to receive his
dying statements, when, after confirming the depositions he had made upon
oath, he said that being benevolently forgiven by the Chevalier D’Eon,
who was present, for all the injury he had done to him, he met death with
great pleasure. In his will, dated July 21 of the same year, and proved
at Doctors’ Commons on October 10, we find him strictly adhering to the
substance of the evidence he had given ten years previously.

    ‘... I declare that all which I have wrote and had printed
    at London in 1763 against the Chevalier D’Eon, then Minister
    Plenipotentiary of France to this court, I said it, wrote it,
    and had it printed only in consequence of the orders and
    money that were given to me by the Count de Guerchy, and in
    consequence of the plot formed at Paris in July 1763 between
    the Count de Guerchy and the Count d’Argental, and into which
    plot the said Count d’Argental drew me at Paris, and the
    above-said Count de Guerchy on his arrival at London. I declare
    and protest that I persist, and always will persist, in the
    truth of two depositions upon oath which I made and swore to,
    November 12, 1764, before Mr. Justice Wilmot, judge of the
    Court of King’s Bench of England, and November 27, 1764, before
    Mr. Justice Yates, also judge of the Court of King’s Bench
    of England, in which I have given a true and circumstantial
    account of the said plot. In consequence of which I earnestly
    beg the Chevalier D’Eon to forget, and to pardon me all the
    wrong which I have done to him, to his fortune, to himself,
    and to all his family, by being concerned in designs which
    were so hurtful to him—designs whose blackness I was ignorant
    of till the moment when the Count de Guerchy thought that the
    destruction of the Chevalier D’Eon ought not to be retarded any
    longer. The knowledge of this struck me with horror, restored
    me to myself, and made me undertake my defence and that of the
    Chevalier D’Eon....’

The Chevalier was firmly established as secret correspondent in London,
performing his duty loyally and competently, even though frequently
suffering from absolute want in consequence of his pension never being
paid with regularity, and always in arrears; and had it not been for the
hospitality of some of his English friends, foremost amongst whom was
the Marquis of Tavistock,[238] he would have had to endure many a sad
privation. The Duke de Broglie admits that D’Eon accomplished his task
as correspondent and newsmonger with considerable ability, and that he
was the precursor, if not actually the first of political reporters,
and the most trustworthy and wittiest, if not the most useful, of
correspondents. The contents of his letters, of which we give an example,
verified as they may be by the history of the times, testify clearly
enough to his qualities as a shrewd and correct observer, to the facility
with which he obtained information and the unlimited sphere of his
operations, and are probably unique, regard being had to the times in
which he lived, in their resemblance to the efficient productions of our
own modern newspaper reporters.

[Sidenote: WHAT WAS PASSING IN LONDON.]

    _The Chevalier D’Eon to the Count de Broglio._

                                            ‘London, March 15, 1766.

    ‘Sir,—You are perhaps astonished at my not having acknowledged
    the receipt of your letter of the 4th inst. Let me give you my
    reasons; I hope you will find them legitimate, and that you
    will consider my silence to be the effect of my prudence.

    ‘The notorious question of _General Warrants_ for the arrest
    of persons and seizure of their papers, has at last been
    determined, and it is decided that in scarcely any instance
    may a person and his papers be seized, except for high treason
    against the king and country. But it has also been decided
    that unauthorised persons, convicted of corresponding in
    cypher with foreign countries, are liable to arrest and to
    have their papers seized, and to be judged according to the
    nature of their correspondence. This decision, which I cannot
    but admit as being very just and very reasonable, has checked
    my zeal, and has even caused me some alarm, and especially
    since the rupture between Messieurs Pitt and Temple. The one
    may, ere long, be called to the ministry, suspect me, and
    cause me to be arrested for the sake of vexing the other;
    add to this, that as Messieurs Pitt and Temple do not at any
    time spare the ministers in office, I am equally liable to
    being suspected and inconvenienced by the latter. You must be
    aware of the evil results were I arrested with all the old
    secret correspondence!... Under these circumstances I deemed
    it wiser to keep still and thus remove the slightest cause
    for suspicion.... What will most astonish is this, that the
    ministers actually in office, in their anxiety for popularity,
    have acted against the opinion, the wishes, and the orders of
    the King, in causing the repeal, by the House of Commons, of
    the Acts of Parliament whereby fresh taxes have been imposed
    in America, the people having rebelled to a degree without
    parallel in history; and they have had the assurance to make
    use of their resources and favour at Court for the purpose of
    securing votes! In this remarkable business they have made so
    sorrowful a personage as his Britannic Majesty play a part
    similar to that assigned in Virgil’s Æneid to King Latinus.
    Truly, they treat the King as if he were a silly child,
    incapable of discerning what is of advantage to the State, and
    they do not in the least conceal their views in the matter....
    The King is incensed against his mother (the Princess of
    Wales), and his favourite (Lord Bute); but they do not know
    how to form a new ministry that will be well considered and
    durable. The King will have nothing to do with Mr. Pitt just
    now, and is even very angry with him in consequence of what he
    has dared to say and substantiate in the House of Commons—that
    the Americans were not rebels, seeing that the King, or the
    late ministry and parliament, had broken faith with them; that
    it was common justice to repeal the Acts of Parliament, which
    he could not consider otherwise than as acts of fraud on the
    Americans. At first every member in the House felt indignant
    at these sentiments, and it was thought that his popularity
    was gone; being henceforth no longer feared, he will no longer
    be necessary. He was supported by four or five members only,
    and his opponents expressed the opinion, in a full House, that
    Mr. Pitt deserved to be sent to the Tower. He retired to the
    country for eight days, and then returned to declaim before
    the House more emphatically than ever, supporting his opinions
    by all manner of arguments founded on natural, civil, and
    political laws, even quoting the Holy Scriptures frequently,
    that he might the more ably imitate the great seer, Cromwell.
    He also pretended to be suffering from gout, that he might
    enjoy the privilege of assisting at the deliberations at his
    ease, holding forth, at one moment seated, at another standing,
    wrapped up in a blanket; he would then fall into a swoon, or
    sink into deep meditations. During this time, his friends and
    a large number of city merchants having property in America or
    interested in its trade, won over a crowd of partisans from
    amongst the people, and proceeded to the House to sing aloud
    the praises of Mr. Pitt. This political and periodical gout,
    and all this _charlatanerie_, which does not fail to excite the
    people, had so great an effect on the House of Commons that
    nearly all the members have sided with Mr. Pitt, and the repeal
    of the Act has already passed the House. Thus has the fault
    strenuously charged against the distinguished patriot served to
    crown him with glory, at least in the eyes of the people.

    ‘A few days ago the King and Queen dined with the Princess of
    Wales, who is unwell. The after-dinner conversation between
    the august personages became so animated, that the servants
    in the ante-room overheard the discussions which were being
    conducted with warmth far from royal. Although the King enjoys
    an income of 120,000_l._ sterling, I know from Temple, who has
    learnt it from his brother, lately paymaster at the Treasury,
    who has verified the fact, that his personal debts, contracted
    since he ascended the throne, amount to upwards of half a
    million sterling, and this in consequence of having followed
    the advice of Lord Bute, and distributed sums of money for the
    sake of securing votes in Parliament and establishing royal
    authority, all of which has turned out very amiss. These debts,
    the wish to bribe, as well as the economical education given
    him by the Princess of Wales, oblige him to live in London and
    at Richmond with a niggardliness unworthy of royalty. He never
    has any kind of supplies, but sends for six bottles of wine at
    a time, and for one bottle of rum with which to brew punch, so
    that he is the laughing-stock of all the city dealers, who are
    great feeders, heavy drinkers, and whose jokes are as light
    as their roast-beef. Numerous pamphlets and prints have been
    published on the subject, and the matter has been turned into
    jest on the stage. In his almost daily drives between London
    and Richmond, the King takes for his body-guard a detachment
    of five-and-twenty light horse of the _élite_ or of the
    _bourgeois_; it is only a few days since a whole detachment of
    these supposed guards was placed under arrest for playing at
    highway robbery, pistol in hand.

    ‘Just fancy into what hands the King and the royal family
    have fallen! It is whispered by profound politicians or great
    enemies to Lord Bute, that the latter, who is allied to the
    house of Stuart, is, from the bottom of his heart, deeply
    attached to the Pretender; that he very ably serves this old
    master whilst shaping the conduct of the King of England as he
    does, which may in the end result in the Crown being lost to
    the House of Hanover. God alone is able to search the heart of
    this Scotchman. I consider Lord Bute to be as clever as he is
    shrewd; I certainly consider him even more shrewd than he is
    clever; but, notwithstanding his skill at intrigue, which I
    admit, I do not think he has a very bad heart—were it so, we
    should be forced to acknowledge that there never existed a more
    cunning rascal. It must, however, be admitted that we find,
    especially in the history of Scotland, traits of character
    still more odious. Ambition or religion is capable of the
    greatest crimes, even more than of the greatest virtues. You
    may make what reflections you please on the above, but I think
    it my duty to communicate to you the opening before me, upon a
    subject of such importance.

                              ‘I am, &c.’

    ‘P.S.—A few evenings ago the Duke of York, not very particular
    in his love affairs, was surprised with a lady by her husband,
    a captain, who wounded him slightly on the shoulder with a
    stroke of his sword, so that he has had to keep his room for
    some days; but this affair was hushed up immediately. His
    brother, the Duke of Gloucester, has fallen violently in love
    with the young dowager Lady Waldegrave, and as it is feared he
    might contract a secret marriage, it is arranged that he is
    to travel abroad with the Duke of Brunswick, who will return
    to England to conduct his consort to Germany. So far as this
    duke is concerned, he does not live on good terms with the
    Princess Augusta, his wife, who, however, is jealous of her
    husband. Persons in the palace have assured my friend that the
    prince’s love for his wife has cooled because he has discovered
    that she has an issue on the leg, and that their two children
    are already attacked with the King’s evil, that is to say,
    scrofula, of which the King’s younger brother has lately died.’

De Broglio lost no time in replying. He desired D’Eon to seek to
discover, by diligent research, in which he was to observe the
greatest circumspection, what prospect there would be of success
were the restoration of the Stuarts to be attempted; and he further
wished to know whether it would be dangerous to sound Lord Bute as to
his secret intentions, or whether it would be better to watch and wait.
The Chevalier recommended the latter course, saying that according
to his judgment men and things were not sufficiently matured.[239]

[Sidenote: THE CHEVALIER SLANDERED.]

The number of D’Eon’s friends in every class of London society, clearly
exceeded that of his enemies who were seeking to discredit him in public
opinion, by resorting to the daily papers as a vehicle for their malice.
We may mention as an example, that in October of this year there appeared
in the ‘St. James’ Chronicle’[240] the announcement of a work preparing
for the press, and in due time to be published and _dedicated to
Parliament_, which would contain amongst other matter: ‘An Account of the
Chevalier D’Eon’s overtures to impeach three persons, by name, of SELLING
THE PEACE TO FRANCE—an Account of the Bill of Indictment found against a
great foreigner for a conspiracy to assassinate the Chevalier D’Eon—an
Account of the _nolle prosequi_ granted to stop proceedings against the
said foreigner—an Account of the attempt made to seize the person and
papers of the Chevalier D’Eon, on November 20, 1764, by a warrant from
the then ministry—an Account of the pension granted to Count Viri for
_his services_ in making the Peace—Extract of a letter from the Duke of
N——s to the Duke de Praslin, dated London, February 20, 1763.’

D’Eon’s indignant notification and protest at the liberty taken with his
name, and disowning all participation in the forthcoming pamphlet, was
prompt and conclusive, and inserted in the same paper in French with an
English translation.

    _To the Author of the ‘St. James’ Chronicle.’_

    ‘Sir,—I have seen with much surprise, in your paper of the 7th
    inst., an advertisement of a work said to be preparing for the
    press, dedicated to your Parliament, containing, amongst other
    extraordinary pieces, _An account of the Chevalier D’Eon’s
    overtures to impeach three persons, by name, of selling the
    Peace to the French_, and other papers of that nature. If I had
    been the author, I should not have had the impertinence to have
    dedicated them to your Parliament, nor to have inserted names
    so respectable as those in your said advertisement. I declare
    to you, sir, as well as to your public, upon my honour, that I
    have no concern, directly or indirectly, in the impression of
    any such work, nor in any other which may be published in my
    name, or in any way insinuating that I have had, or will have
    any concern therein. And to authenticate as much as possible,
    this my declaration, I beg you will immediately print the above
    in your paper.[241]

    ‘I am, Sir,

                         ‘Your humble servant,

                                              ‘The CHEVALIER D’EON.’

    ‘York, October 18, 1766.’

[Sidenote: DR. MUSGRAVE’S ADDRESS.]

The author of the notice publicly disavowed by D’Eon was believed by
some to be a Dr. Musgrave,[242] who, availing himself three years later
of a general election, issued an _Address to the Gentlemen, Clergy, and
Freeholders of the County of Devon_, under date, Plymouth, August 12,
1769, which he caused to be extensively circulated about the kingdom.
In this document, intended in reality for the people of England,
Dr. Musgrave represented that whilst residing in Paris, in 1764, he
discovered that the Peace signed the previous year had been sold to the
French by some persons of high rank. He had at different times been
informed by Sir George Younge, Mr. Fitzherbert, and other members of
Parliament, that overtures were made to them during the summer of 1764,
in the name of the Chevalier D’Eon, imputing that he, the Chevalier, was
ready to impeach three persons, two of whom were peers and members of the
Privy Council, for selling the Peace to the French, Sir George Younge
having in particular told him that he understood the charge could be
supported by written as well as by living evidence. By direction of Dr.
Blackstone[243] he waited, May 10, 1765, on Lord Halifax, Secretary of
State, and delivered to him an exact narrative of the intelligence he had
received at Paris, with copies of four letters to and from Lord Hertford;
seven days after which interview, he was informed by Mr. Fitzherbert that
overtures were then being made to the Chevalier D’Eon to get his papers
from him for a stipulated sum of money. When pressed by Dr. Musgrave, at
a second interview, to inquire into the truth of the charge, Lord Halifax
objected to all public steps that might cause alarm, and asked him to
point out a way of prosecuting the inquiry in secret, and whether, in
so doing, there was any probability of obtaining positive proof of the
alleged facts. The Doctor urged Lord Halifax to send for the Chevalier
D’Eon and examine him upon the subject, to peruse his papers, and then
proceed according to proofs, it being well known that the Chevalier
had the negotiations on the part of the French, also the despatches
of the Duke de Nivernois. This his lordship refused to do; the Doctor
therefore took it upon himself to accuse the Secretary of State of wilful
obstruction of national justice in delaying inquiry, such obstruction not
only giving a temporary impunity to offenders, but tending also to make
the impunity perpetual, seeing that living witnesses were exposed to the
chances of mortality, and written evidence to the not uncommon casualty
of fire. The Doctor went on to say that the papers upon which the whole
of the written evidence depended were anything but secure—they were not
in safety. Did it not stand upon record that the Count de Guerchy had
conspired to assassinate the Chevalier D’Eon, a charge that had not been
either refuted or answered; which, not succeeding, a band of ruffians was
hired to kidnap that gentleman and carry off his papers! Lord Halifax’s
refusals did not deter him from carrying his own papers to the Speaker
to be laid before the late House of Commons. The Speaker was pleased to
justify his conduct by allowing that the affair ought to be inquired
into, although refusing to be instrumental in promoting the inquiry.
Dr. Musgrave concluded his address by submitting the prosecution of the
affair to the judgment of those for whom his message was intended, in
full confidence that the result of their deliberations would do honour at
the same time to their prudence, candour, and patriotism.[244]

Dr. Musgrave’s paper was intended to persuade the people of England
that what many already believed was true—that the French Court had paid
immense sums of money to the Princess of Wales, Lord Bute, the Duke of
Richmond, Lords Egremont and Halifax, and Count Viri, towards bringing
about a general peace, a remonstrance which set the whole nation in a
flame. The Court of St. James, the Peace of 1763 and all who had a hand
in it, became the objects of universal hatred, and in 1770 Parliament was
obliged to take serious notice of the movement.[245] D’Eon, regardless
of expense, was not content to oppose Musgrave’s popular scandal and
that of a throng of writers, who, without any proof whatever, attempted
to support such rash and dishonourable reports, but he also, by his
depositions, in a great measure contributed to the discrediting of the
Doctor’s virulence, and the latter was reprimanded by the Speaker of
the House of Commons as the disturber of public tranquillity, D’Eon on
his part gaining the approbation of the two courts and of the people in
general.[246]

[Sidenote: D’EON’S LETTER TO DR. MUSGRAVE.]

    _D’Eon’s letter to Dr. Musgrave._

    ‘Sir,—You will permit me to believe that you never knew any
    more of me than I have the honour of knowing of you, and if
    in your letter of August 12 you had not made a wrong use of
    my name, I should not now find myself obliged to enter into
    a correspondence with you. You pretend that in the summer
    of 1764, overtures were made in my name to several members
    of Parliament, importing that I was ready to impeach three
    persons, two of whom were Peers and members of the Privy
    Council, of having sold the Peace to the French, and you seem
    to found thereupon the evidence of a charge which you say you
    carried yourself to Lord Halifax. I declare, therefore, here,
    that I never made or caused to be made, any such overture,
    either in the winter or the summer of 1764, nor at any other
    time. I am on one side too faithful to the office I filled, and
    on the other too zealous a friend to truth.... I assure you I
    do not know either Sir George Younge or Mr. Fitzherbert, and
    never authorised any person whatever to make in my name such
    overtures, which the abhorrence alone I have for calumny would
    make me detest. I call upon you, therefore, to lay before the
    public the name of the audacious person who has made use of
    mine to discover his own odious offers. The gentlemen whom you
    have given as your witnesses cannot deny you this justification
    of their own veracity and yours.... It appears to me an act of
    the last imprudence, in an affair of so much weight, to build
    upon report for naming publicly a person of my character,
    without having previously consulted him. If you had recollected
    the contradictions I gave in ‘St. James’ Chronicle’ of October
    25, 1760, No. 881, to an advertisement in the same paper,
    No. 875, you had saved me the trouble of replying to you at
    this time. What must be the result? The public will have read
    greedily your letter; will have believed its contents because
    you appeal therein to my testimony. But what will they think
    now, when your own interest, my honour and truth oblige me to
    deny all that you have advanced therein with respect to me.
    It is the same with your pretence that about May 17, 1765,
    Mr. Fitzherbert told you he knew that overtures had been made
    to me, to sell for a sum of money the papers that were in my
    hands.... I here certify to you, on my word of honour, and in
    the face of the public, that I cannot be of any sort of use
    to you, that I never entered into any treaty for the sale of
    papers, and never either by myself, or any agent authorised on
    my part, offered to make appear that the Peace had been sold
    to France. If Lord Halifax or the Speaker had caused me to
    be cited, he might have known by my answers what my thoughts
    were, that England rather gave money to France than France to
    England, to conclude the last Peace, and that the happiness
    I had in concurring to the great work of peace, has inspired
    me with sentiments of the justest veneration for the English
    commissioners who had been employed in it, and with the most
    lively esteem and sincerest admiration for the late Count Viri,
    who, in his attachment to the welfare of the two nations then
    at war, and thanks to his indefatigable zeal, had the glory
    of bringing that peace to a happy conclusion.... In order to
    enable you to be as prudent as patriotic, I sign this letter
    and therein give you my address, that for the maintenance
    of your own veracity you may furnish me with the means of
    convicting publicly those slanderers who have dared to make use
    of my name, in a manner still more repugnant to real facts than
    the dignity with which I have ever supported my character.[247]

                             ‘I have, &c.,

                                              ‘The CHEVALIER D’EON.’

    ‘In Petty France, Westminster.’




CHAPTER XII.

    D’Eon and Wilkes—Fickle Louis XV.!—Literary labours—Doubts
    raised as to D’Eon’s sex—Princess Dashkoff—Heavy gambling
    transactions on D’Eon’s sex—Insult resented—Irritation at being
    thought a female—Indignant denial of being concerned in the
    bets made—State of penury—Offers of relief from Poniatovsky,
    now King of Poland—Saves England from war—Officially reported
    to be a female—Personal appearance—Death of Louis XV.—D’Eon’s
    estimate of the late king—Count de Broglio’s report on D’Eon to
    Louis XVI.—System of secret correspondence abolished—D’Eon to
    continue his reports in cypher.


The expulsion of John Wilkes from the House of Commons and his trial
for libel, and D’Eon’s conviction on a similar charge, both of which
took place in 1764, were almost contemporary events, and although the
Chevalier abstained from taking any part in the riots of that year, he
never failed, when opportunity offered, to show his sympathy for _Wilkes
and Liberty!_ After the great agitator had returned to England in 1768,
and was undergoing his sentence of twenty-two months’ imprisonment in
King’s Bench for seditious libel and blasphemy, D’Eon one day sent him a
present of twelve smoked tongues, with a note in which he expressed the
wish that ‘the tongues might have the eloquence of Cicero and the nicety
of speech of Voltaire,’ to laud him worthily upon the anniversary of his
birth, which, in the future, would ever be regarded as that of English
liberty.’[248]

A singular letter from Louis XV. to the Count de Broglio, dated February
12, 1767, commences thus:—

    ‘You know that D’Eon is a madman, and perhaps a dangerous one,
    but there is nothing better to be done with madmen than to lock
    them up, and certainly in England he is recognised as such,
    and cannot be of any use to the English except to afford them
    amusement, and enable them to make fun of M. de Guerchy. I do
    not know what instructions M. de Fuentes has had, or expects
    to receive, in regard to him.[249] For all that, all I have
    promised him must be performed, but nothing more. I have a
    deadly hatred to madmen....’

Yet the man who was considered insane only when it suited the King to say
so, was retained as secret agent enjoying the royal confidence, and upon
the Baron de Breteuil, nominated ambassador to Holland, being sent to
England in 1768 on a special mission, he was ordered ‘to see and confer
with D’Eon,’ which, however, he was to do ‘in the most secret manner
possible.’[250]

[Sidenote: BRIEF LULLS.]

For the next few years D’Eon beguiled his leisure in literary labours,
spending his summers chiefly at Staunton Harold, Earl Ferrers’ seat in
Leicestershire. He retired late and rose early, worked fifteen hours a
day, partook of one meal only, at two P.M., and refused to receive any
visitors except on Sundays. His ordinary residence from July 1769, when
he quitted 32 Brewer Street, and 1772, when he returned to those his old
quarters, was Petty France, Westminster, the house he occupied having
a garden bordering on the park, and to which he removed to be near his
friend, Mr. Cotes. He produced ‘Les Loisirs du Chevalier D’Eon, &c., in
thirteen volumes,[251] which he dedicated to his friend and protector,
the now disgraced and exiled Duke de Choiseul.

    ‘... It is, my lord, in the land of philosophy and liberty,
    where one learns not to bestow praise except on virtue and
    merit, that my mind, freed from prejudice, publicly exposes the
    traits that characterise you.’

[Illustration: THE CHEVALIER D’EON.

1770.

_See Appendix._]

Commenting on this dedication, a newspaper article thus eulogises D’Eon:—

    ‘There is as great a singularity in the character of the
    Chevalier D’Eon, as _in our ignorance of his sex_. The rule
    of his life is peculiar to himself; no other man or woman
    would, in the same position, write and behave as he does. Is
    it reason, virtue, or caprice that dictates his conduct, and
    makes him in his manners the reverse of our men of fashion? Let
    our readers judge from the following fact. Our courtiers adore
    the man upon whom fortune smiles, and rail at him as soon as
    he is no longer in favour; the Chevalier follows an unjustly
    disgraced minister in his exile, and there pays him the tribute
    of praise he refused him in the time of his prosperity. When
    the French Court conceal their esteem for the Duke de Choiseul,
    and bend the knee to the favourite they despise, to that duke
    the Chevalier dedicates his “Loisirs”—him he openly dares to
    commend! That oddity will not make a fortune at St. James’; it
    cannot be applauded when folly holds the place of merit, and
    immorality rides triumphant over the ruins of religion!’[252]

The work was well received, and especially, it was said, at Berlin, where
the notices it contained on political administration, and particularly
that branch relating to finance, caused so favourable an impression on
the ministers, for they found therein a quantity of new and extremely
useful ideas, that his Prussian Majesty ordered they should immediately
be put into operation for the benefit of the public and of the
Government.[253]

[Sidenote: FEMALE OR MALE?]

The Chevalier’s popularity, chiefly amongst those who interested
themselves in the politics of the day, had never waned since his first
introduction into English society, much of the favour he enjoyed being
due to his genial and agreeable manners, his openness of character, and
the dignity and spirit of independence with which he bore his trials;
but in the year we have reached—1769—his name, somewhat more freely
canvassed, began to attain unenviable notoriety, for doubts were being
seriously entertained as to the nature of his sex, and what was at first
whispered from mouth to ear became openly revealed, until public opinion
had fairly fastened on the idea that the Chevalier D’Eon was not a man at
all but a woman! And when the Princess Dashkoff, who chanced to arrive
in England at this juncture, related that D’Eon, whom she perfectly well
knew at St. Petersburg, had been received and entertained by the Empress
Elizabeth with all the intimacy to which his believed in sex admitted
him, further doubts existed in the minds of a few only; and what had been
suspected was boldly advanced as a certainty, the Count de Châtelet,
French ambassador in London, among the number, writing to tell Louis
XV. he was persuaded that the Chevalier was a _fille_. According to a
biographical memoir in the ‘Gentleman’s Magazine,’ vol. liii., the first
indications that led to a suspicion of D’Eon’s sex was a wound received
in a duel.

John Taylor, the author of ‘Monsieur Tonson,’ who had met the Chevalier
in advanced life, was assured by a very old friend of his father,
one well acquainted with D’Eon at this period, that his manners were
captivating and that he might have married most advantageously, as
several ladies of good family and with large fortunes had made overtures
to him at their country seats where he visited; but that upon all such
occasions he immediately left the house, whence it was inferred he
quitted the place on account of his being really of the female sex.[254]

It was the fashion in England for all matters of dispute to become the
subject of betting, and gambling transactions attained extraordinary
proportions, the lead being taken at Brooks’s, White’s, and other clubs,
as Walpole relates in some curious anecdotes. The uncertainty of the
sex of a noted character was too fair an opportunity to be wasted,
and gambling policies of insurance were effected to large amounts, as
shown in the opposite statement, giving an idea of the extent to which
such transactions were carried within the first few months of their
being started, reaching, as they subsequently did, considerably larger
proportions.

       _Insurance on the Sex of Monsieur the Chevalier D’Eon._[256]

    DR.

    1770.                                                      £ _s._ _d._
  March 28. To premium on 600_l._ at 15 gs.
                per cent                94_l._ 10_s._
            Policy.                            10_s._ 6_d._
                                        -------------------    95   0   6
  March 30. To premium on 200_l._ at 15 gs.
                per cent.                                      31  10   0
                Do.       300_l._  do.                         47   5   0
                Do.       200_l._  do.                         31  10   0
                Do.       100_l._  do.                         15  15   0
  April 10.     Do.       500_l._  do.  78_l._ 15_s._
            Policy.                            10_s._ 6_d._
                                        -------------------    79   5   6
  April 30. To premium on 500_l._ at 20 gs.
                per cent. and Policy                          105  10   6
            Do. 1,000_l._ at 10 gs. per cent.                 105   0   0
                ---------                                     -----------
                3,400_l._                                     510  16   6
            To profit                                         658  13   6
                                                            -------------
                                                            1,169  10   0

    CR.

    1770.                                                      £ _s._ _d._
  June 19. By  300_l._ compromised at 50 per cent.            150   0   0
           ” 2,300_l._ sold at 40 per cent.                   920   0   0
           ”   300_l._ sold at 20 per cent.                    60   0   0
           ”   500_l._ sold at 20 per cent.                   100   0   0
             ---------                                      -------------
             3,400_l._                                      1,230   0   0
  Brokerage at 5 per cent.                                     60  10   0
                                                            -------------
                                                            1,169  10   0

  Whereof par ¼ of the profit is 164_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._

To add to the chagrin endured at the gross liberties taken with his name,
the Chevalier was reproached by his enemies with being an accomplice in
the scandalous jobbing affairs and a sharer in the plunder, charges he
indignantly repudiated when unburdening himself to his old friend the
count.[255]

    ‘... I am grieved to hear, and even to read in the English
    papers, all the extraordinary reports that reach from Paris,
    London, and even St. Petersburg, on the uncertainty of my sex,
    and which gain ground in a country of enthusiasts such as
    this, and to such an extent, that policies of insurance for
    considerable sums are being publicly effected upon so indecent
    a subject, both at Court and in the city. I held my peace for a
    long time. My silence only served to increase suspicion and the
    number of insurances. I consequently repaired, last Saturday,
    to the Exchange and to the several neighbouring coffee-houses,
    where all kinds of insurances and stock-jobbing take place,
    and there, in uniform, walking-stick in hand, I obliged the
    money-broker Bird, who was the first to start one of these
    impudent insurances, to beg my pardon. Yielding the choice
    of weapons, I challenged to fight anybody who might consider
    himself the most incredulous, the bravest, or the most insolent
    of the entire assembly, and several thousands were present. All
    treated me with great courtesy, and in their amazement not one
    of those male adversaries, in this great city, dared either to
    cross sticks or to fight me, even though I remained in their
    midst from noon until two o’clock, to afford them ample time to
    decide amongst themselves. I took my leave, making my address
    generally known in the event of any one changing his mind. This
    is the way in which such people should be taken in hand and
    silenced. They are most insolent in the liberties they take,
    even with the greatest persons at Court, and the more reason
    with me, a private individual whom they know to be exiled
    from France, and lonely. Bird assured me, in the face of his
    apologies, that he and his colleagues were able to effect the
    most extraordinary insurances or wagers, even in regard to the
    royal family, except, in observance of an Act of Parliament,
    so far as concerned the life of the King, the Queen, and their
    children, and that he was employed by a great lady, whose name
    he refused to communicate, to effect an insurance on my sex....’

    ‘... I beg of you, sir, not to be displeased with your old
    aide-de-camp, if you read in the _Gazette_, or elsewhere, that
    on the 7th of this month I broke my cane across two Englishmen
    for taking impudent liberties with my name. My conduct has
    been approved by military men and others alive to a sense of
    honour. Since making my two visits to the city, nobody has
    dared, either at court or anywhere about town, to make a wager,
    publicly, on the nature of my sex, of which I have stamped
    virile proofs on the faces of two insolent fellows....’

    ‘Some of my discreet friends have recommended me to leave
    London for a month or two, and travel quietly in Ireland under
    an assumed name, for I am not known there. In spite of my
    threats and the blows I have dealt, and of my conduct through
    life, an inconceivable mania for effecting insurances to a
    considerable amount on the uncertainty of my sex has again
    taken hold of people in the city, and I am cautioned, from
    several quarters, that some rich persons entertain the idea of
    having me carried off, by artifice, force, or stratagem, so
    that the point may be settled in defiance of me, a thing I will
    not tolerate, and which, should the attempt be made, will place
    me under the cruel necessity of killing somebody.... I can
    declare to you, sir, upon my honour, that I am not interested
    to the value of even one _sou_ in these bets and insurances....
    I am sufficiently mortified at being what nature has made me,
    and that the dispassion of my natural temperament should induce
    my friends to imagine, in their innocence, and this in France,
    in Russia, and in England, that I am of the female sex. The
    malice of my enemies has confirmed all this since the beginning
    of my misfortunes, which I have not by any means deserved, and
    of which I should have been rid long ago. I leave all to the
    King’s and to your own kindness of heart....’[257]

[Sidenote: ON THE DEFENSIVE.]

The tone of swagger repeated in the above letters, would dispose to the
belief that D’Eon was exaggerating the degree of front he had shown to
those Englishmen who were taking unwarrantable liberties with his name;
but the measure of his veracity would appear to be out of the question.
In the ‘Public Advertiser’ of November 16, 1774, it was stated that—

    ‘the Chevalier D’Eon with justice complains of our public
    prints; they are eternally sending him to France, when he is
    body and soul fixed in this country; they have lately confined
    him to the Bastille, when he fled to England as a country of
    liberty, and they lately made a woman of him, when not one of
    his enemies dared to put his manhood to the proof. He makes no
    complaint of the English ladies.’

That the calumnies of which D’Eon continued to be the object were not
chargeable to all classes of society, is to be inferred from a notice
which appeared in the papers a few days later, announcing—

    ‘Earl Ferrers, Sir John Fielding, Messieurs Addington and
    Wright, and other worthy magistrates and gentlemen, and their
    ladies, did the Chevalier the honour to dine with him in Brewer
    Street, Golden Square, a convincing proof that he is not
    confined in the Bastille, as certain weak and wicked persons
    have popularly asserted, ignorant of the justice and honour his
    worth and merit have deserved.’

Being at dinner one day with his friend Angelo, D’Eon was informed of the
presence, in the next room, of a Jew named Treves who would, on condition
that he discovered his sex, on the instant pay him one thousand pounds;
when, says Henry Angelo, he flew into such a violent passion, that it was
with much difficulty his father could restrain him in his rage against
the Israelite.

For the second time in his life the Chevalier found himself to be in
imminent peril of being kidnapped in the interests of those who had
heavy stakes on his sex, and were pressing for having the question
resolved off-hand. Leaving London, he wandered restlessly in the north,
until he saw in the papers that his disappearance was causing anxiety
to his friends, who were offering a handsome reward and the payment of
all reasonable expenses for any intelligence that should lead to his
recovery, if concealed or restrained of his liberty. He was described
as being dressed, upon leaving his home, in scarlet faced with green,
and wearing the cross of Saint Louis; he had a new plain hat with silver
button, loop and band, and his sword, but no cane. Inquired after and
sought, and no trace of him being obtainable, a _caveat_ was entered
at Doctors’ Commons against his goods, on the supposition that he was
dead. Hastening back he informed his friend, Mr. Fountain, of Litchfield
Street, who had been most active in searching after him, of his arrival
in London, in a note which appeared in the papers[258] the following
morning with the announcement:—

    ‘This night, about eleven o’clock, the Chevalier D’Eon, whose
    extraordinary disappearance above six weeks ago has been the
    subject of much conversation and inquiry, arrived in good
    health at his house in Petty France, Westminster.’

[Sidenote: A PROTEST.]

Then, in due course, he presented himself before Lord Mayor Crosby,[259]
as the most public way of testifying that he was alive, and made an
affidavit to the effect that—

    ‘he never had, and never would have any part, directly or
    indirectly, in the policies of insurance made on his sex; that
    he had never touched and never would touch a single guinea
    from any person or persons, on account of the said insurances;
    that he never would enter into any negotiations with any
    person or persons, however considerable the sums that had been
    offered to him, and which had amounted to 25,000_l._, to prove,
    judicially, his sex.’

In reporting his proceedings to de Broglio the Chevalier wrote:—

    ‘I have only had time to travel over the North of England,
    and a part of Scotland. Two important reasons prevented me
    from going to Ireland as I had intended. 1. My funds were
    insufficient. 2. Because, whilst on my travels, I noticed
    in the English papers that the public, ever jealous of its
    liberties, was much alarmed, and that my own friends were
    greatly concerned at my supposed abduction, and that all
    the doors of the house I occupy had been sealed. I returned
    immediately to reassure the public and my friends, as well as
    to attend to my private affairs. With regard to the cypher and
    King’s papers, I had, as you are aware, insured their safety
    before I went away, and they would not have been found, at
    least not unless the house was razed to the ground.

    ‘By last Tuesday’s post I sent to you the “Public Advertiser,”
    which contains the declaration I made, under oath, before
    the Lord Mayor, that I am not interested to the value of one
    shilling, directly or indirectly, in the policies of insurance
    that have been effected on my person. It is not my fault if
    the rage for betting, on all matters, is a national disorder
    amongst Englishmen, who will frequently risk even more than
    the fortune they possess on a single horse-race. I do not
    care for all their policies of insurance, their articles,
    newspapers, prints, or themselves either, and they are aware of
    it. I have given proof, and will again do so to their hearts’
    content, that I am not only a man, but a captain of dragoons
    with sword in hand. It is not my fault if the Court of Russia,
    and notably, the Princess Dashkoff, has assured the English
    Court that I am a female. It is not my fault if the Duke de
    Praslin has caused secret, and almost public, inquiry to be
    pursued in France to confirm this fact, whilst his friend de
    Guerchy sneakingly spread the report at this Court that I am
    a hermaphrodite! Anyhow, it is not my fault if I exist such
    as nature formed me; perfectly or imperfectly formed, I have
    ever, heart and soul, faithfully served the King in politics
    as in war. I am in a condition to serve him better than ever,
    and shall be at all times ready to fly, at his bidding,
    whithersoever he may send me.’[260]

[Sidenote: THE KING OF POLAND TO THE RESCUE.]

D’Eon never allowed anything to interfere with his first object in
life, that of supplying his royal master with the fullest information
on every subject of interest; this, however, was not to be effected
without resources of some kind; and as it was his misfortune ever to be
left without funds, even to not receiving his pension with any degree
of regularity, he became fast involved in serious difficulties, which
obliged him to live in a state of misery that became a terrible burden
for one of his past life and habits to bear. He might have been the
possessor of thousands had he been less patriotic, less scrupulous, and
less resolved to put up with his every-day distressing privations. Patent
as the Chevalier’s condition was to everybody, still did he stand accused
of being a confederate in the dishonest transactions of which he was the
innocent cause. At length relief appeared to be at hand. Poniatovsky,
King of Poland, who had not forgotten the pleasant evenings he had
enjoyed at sword practice with D’Eon at St. Petersburg, wrote with his
own hand to offer him an asylum and employment, and for the second time,
driven by want and despair, did the faithful servant’s loyalty waver, for
he asked permission of his cruel master to accept the invitation. But
it was not to be, as de Broglio notified in his reply, approved in the
King’s hand.

    ‘... I am not surprised that the King of Poland should have
    said such kind things to you through his chamberlain. This
    prince is acquainted with you, has heard you well spoken of
    in Russia, and knows how useful you might be to him; but
    you should also bear in mind that you cannot serve the King
    elsewhere so usefully as in London, especially under present
    circumstances; nor is there any other place where you can be
    in greater safety against the malice of your enemies than in
    London. Continue, therefore, your correspondence with me and
    his Majesty; it is the wish of the King, who again bids you not
    leave England without his orders. But his Majesty approves of
    the correspondence you have been invited to entertain with the
    King of Poland. There is nothing to be apprehended in this.
    Being convinced of your attachment and loyalty, his Majesty
    authorises me to leave you at full liberty in this matter. I
    have only to call your attention to all that may be of interest
    to his Majesty, and to assure you that I shall have much
    pleasure in bringing to the notice of the King your services
    upon the present and upon all future occasions.’[261]

Much of D’Eon’s correspondence with the King at this time was
pseudonymous, the assumed name being William Wolff. There is no
probability, whatever, of the subjects of it becoming generally known,
but it may be said that the Chevalier saved England, France, and Spain
from a ruinous war that was nearly taking place on account of the dispute
relative to the Falkland Islands. This was done through his secret
communications with Louis XV., to whom he represented the worthlessness
of those islands and their barrenness.[262]

De Broglio’s letter of May 11, given above, was entrusted to Drouet[263]
for delivery to the Chevalier, the startling report he made upon quickly
returning to France, as the result of his interview with D’Eon, being
immediately communicated by de Broglio to Louis XV.

    ‘... I must not omit to inform your Majesty that the suspicions
    entertained on the sex of this extraordinary personage are
    well founded. M. Drouet, who had received my instructions to
    do his best to verify them, has assured me, since his return,
    that he has succeeded and is able to certify ... that M. D’Eon
    is a female, and nothing but a female (_fille_), of which he
    has all the attributes ... we must admit that this statement
    forms the climax to his history.... He begged M. Drouet to keep
    the secret, justly observing that if discovered his occupation
    were gone. May I entreat your Majesty to be pleased to allow
    that the confidence he has reposed in his friend be not
    betrayed, and that he will have no cause to regret what he has
    done....’[264]

[Sidenote: PERSONAL APPEARANCE.]

Let us here note that although D’Eon was described at this period as
having a rather effeminate countenance, blue eyes, small features, and
as being pale, he had a dark beard, wore a wig and cue, and ever appeared
in the same dress—that of an officer of dragoons, red with pea-green
lapels and silver lace. He stood about five feet seven inches, and was
rather inclined to corpulency.[265]

Whether or no de Broglio and the King believed in Drouet’s bewildering
assertion, made with so much circumstance, it is certain that no action
was taken either to the prejudice or in favour of D’Eon, who was left
in trust of his old office, and again forced to appeal pitifully to the
count.

    ‘... I am in want ... having ceded to my mother the whole of my
    patrimony, and pensioned my old nurse, and having to support
    my nephews.... I venture to say, that had I been born actually
    as weak and timid as I appear to have been destined by nature,
    great evils would have been the consequences. I shall never
    regret having sacrificed myself to save the counsellor from
    sorrows and your family from troubles....’[266]

D’Eon was sighing to leave England, and negotiations with a view to his
being permitted to return to France had been conducted from time to
time since the fall of de Choiseul (1770) by the new minister, the Duke
d’Aiguillon; but the Chevalier comprehensively notes, with reference to
that minister’s proposals—_Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes_.[267] When the
reiterated appeal for succour reached its destination, the count was
again in exile at his seat, Ruffec.

In the early part of 1774, Versailles was visited by an epidemic which
ran through the palace, infecting some fifty or more of its inmates
(amongst them the King’s daughters, Adelaide, Victoire, and Sophie), and
of whom about a dozen, including Louis XV., were carried off.[268] Those
curious to know what were the last days of the profligate and careless
monarch will find, on consulting Sismondi, how a death-bed repentance was
wrested from him by his confessor, the unflinching and unimpeachable Abbé
Mandoux; how the old Marshal de Richelieu remonstrated angrily, and how
the _fils emancipé_ received absolution at the hands of the disconcerted
Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon, the _grand aumônier_, who read the royal
confession.

    ‘Although the King owes an account of his conduct to God
    only, he declares that he repents having been the cause of
    any scandal amongst his subjects, and that he wishes to live
    solely for the maintenance of religion and the happiness of his
    people.’

The interment was anything but royal, for the corpse of _le Bien-aimé_
was hurried in the darkness of the night to the tomb—not its last
resting-place—amidst the execrations of the numbers who had turned out to
see the procession as it hastily passed their way, and who kept shouting
the late King’s favourite cry on the hunting field, _tayau! tayau!_—and
_hallali! hallali!_ his favourite cry at the death, as his remains were
being borne into St. Denis.

Wishing to rid himself of a tipsy customer, the keeper of a drinking-shop
warned the troublesome fellow that the funeral of Louis XV. was about to
pass. ‘What!’ was the answer, ‘we were dying of hunger so long as _ce b——
là_ lived, and are we to die of thirst now that he is dead?’[269]

D’Eon’s faith in the good intentions of his master had never deserted
him, but now that master was dead; and yet, though the Chevalier lived
to see the country he loved so well reap what Louis XV. had sown, his
estimate of that monarch’s character never changed!

    ‘After having been so long concealed under the shadow of the
    wings and of the secret protection of Louis XV., in losing him
    I lost all. Soon after his death I became like a victim who
    has been publicly sacrificed. An unjust idea has ever been
    entertained of the character and talents of Louis XV. If the
    truth were but known, it would be allowed that this prince was
    endowed with great penetration, great judgment, and a profound
    knowledge of men and things. The only quality in which he was
    deficient, was the needed strength of character to control his
    ministers and ambassadors as became a King. Had Heaven endowed
    me with one-half the goodness of the King, my master, and my
    master with one-half of my firmness, not one-half of all that
    occurred would ever have come to pass. I need not be miserable
    for the rest of my days, nor fancy that my honour is tarnished,
    because Louis XV. would never disclose to his ministers the
    nature of my extraordinary position, or openly uphold the
    secret orders and instructions he caused to be secretly
    conveyed to me.’[270]

[Sidenote: THE COUNT DE BROGLIO AND LOUIS XVI.]

Scarcely had Louis XVI. ascended the throne, than the Count de Broglio
addressed a memorandum to the new King, in which was recapitulated the
history of the late sovereign’s secret correspondence from the beginning,
and describing the mode in which it had been conducted. The count exposed
the anomaly of his position, then and during the two-and-twenty years
that he had been secretly employed by Louis XV.; suggested the probable
causes of his exile, maintained he had never fallen away from the royal
favour, and asked his Majesty’s instructions, for his guidance, under
the peculiar circumstances in which he found himself. The King’s
reply—laconic, formal, and unsigned—simply acknowledged the receipt of
the despatch, enjoined the count to continue to observe the strictest
secrecy, and informed him that inquiries should be made in the proper
quarter for the reasons that induced the late King to order him into
exile.[271] De Broglio followed up his memorandum with several letters,
soliciting permission in one of them to communicate certain matters with
which he considered it necessary his Majesty should become acquainted:—

    ‘... I will commence with what concerns the Sieur D’Eon. I
    conceive it to be possible that your Majesty has heard him
    unfavourably spoken of, and that you are therefore astonished
    at finding him included amongst the number of those persons
    honoured with the confidence of the late King. I cannot forbear
    observing that he was initiated in the secret correspondence at
    the time it was under the direction of the Prince de Conti. He
    was sent to Petersburg by that prince in 1756, after which he
    was specially chosen by the Dukes de Praslin and de Nivernois
    for the negotiations for peace in London, in 1762; and the
    late King having at that time important designs on England,
    ordered him to make direct reports. He was then made Minister
    Plenipotentiary in England, during the interval between the
    Embassage of the Duke de Nivernois and the arrival of the
    Count de Guerchy. It is evident that it was this special mark
    of confidence which gave him reason to hope he would receive
    support in his misplaced contentions with that ambassador, who,
    on his part, exhibited perhaps too much hastiness at first, and
    a little want of tact afterwards; but this does not excuse the
    faults of the Sieur D’Eon, whose excessive hastiness was beyond
    all bounds, and gave rise to unseemly incidents between persons
    honoured as they were by the offices they respectively held.
    The Duke de Praslin exercised such extreme severity upon that
    occasion, that the Sieur D’Eon was not to be tranquillised, and
    the latter, unable to return to France, and driven to despair
    and into difficulties, was well-nigh failing in his allegiance
    to his Majesty and about to divulge the secret confided to him,
    which would have shockingly compromised the sacred name of the
    late King, and especially in such a country as England. I was
    for a long time in the greatest fear. I asked his Majesty what
    I was to do, and took the liberty to represent to him that
    anything was preferable to allowing the subject of the secret
    correspondence to be known in England. I received orders to
    send my secretary to England. He knew the Sieur D’Eon, and
    appeased him a little, and it was at length arranged that
    he should remain in London for the purpose of communicating
    intelligence; but it was necessary to guarantee to him, in
    the late King’s own hand, a monthly allowance of one thousand
    livres, which he has enjoyed ever since.[272]

    ‘This singular being (because the Sieur D’Eon is a female) is,
    more so than many others, a compound of good qualities and of
    faults, and he carries the one and the other to extremes. It
    will be necessary that I should have the honour of entering
    into the minutest details on this subject, so soon as your
    Majesty will have definitely decided in the matter of the
    secret correspondence. In the meantime, I venture to take the
    liberty to entreat that his case be not determined until I
    shall have submitted my respectful observations thereon to your
    Majesty. I must not conclude these observations on the Sieur
    D’Eon without having the honour of stating that he occasionally
    signs his letters, “William Wolff.” ...’[273]

[Sidenote: ABOLITION OF THE SECRET CORRESPONDENCE.]

All the details of the secret correspondence, as they were fully
treated upon by the Count de Broglio, proved entirely novel to the
King, who promptly put an end to the system. The money allowed for this
secret service by Louis XV. amounted to 120,000 livres annually, his
confidential agents, with one sole exception, being in the service of the
State, and in receipt of established salaries—as ambassadors, ministers,
residents or secretaries of Embassy; but to several, the reduction
of their emoluments by discontinuance of the secret correspondence
allowances would prove a serious inconvenience, the count therefore
submitted a plan for ensuring to his former colleagues, the faithful
depositaries of State secrets, a life-pension as a reward for their
loyalty and discretion. Approving the scheme, the King responded
liberally, and life-pensions, varying from 1,100 livres to 20,000 livres
per annum, were settled upon the various members of the abolished
department, D’Eon excepted, whose case necessitated special and careful
consideration.

As to the count himself and his recall from exile, he insisted upon
a thorough investigation into his conduct, whether as regarded his
personal acts or his correspondence, both of which too clearly proved
how completely removed from the slightest taint had been his loyalty and
integrity of purpose.

    ‘I have found amongst the King’s effects,’ wrote Louis XVI.,
    ‘several maps and papers, such as you have intimated to me,
    and have tied them together. I have since made every inquiry
    respecting yourself, and find that in all you did you acted
    in accordance with the King’s orders. You have therefore my
    permission to return to Paris or to Court at Compiègne.... I
    approve of your writing to the several ministers to instruct
    them to discontinue the correspondence. I send you a rough
    draft of the letters which you must send to me for my
    signature. As regards yourself, sir, you will collect the whole
    of your papers upon your arrival in Paris, for delivery to M.
    de Vergennes, after which you may take your rest.’[274]

[Sidenote: CLAIMS TO CONSIDERATION.]

The Count de Vergennes had succeeded as Minister for Foreign Affairs[275]
upon the disgrace and exile of the Duke d’Aiguillon, the avowed enemy
of the de Broglios, and whose attitude towards D’Eon had been one of
dangerous hostility. Rejoicing in his fall and full of hope in the new
order of things, the Chevalier appealed to de Broglio for intercession in
his behalf with the young King.

    ‘His late Majesty and you have deigned to approve, by your
    letters of August 22, 1766, &c., my conduct in delivering
    to M. Durand and the Baron de Breteuil the secret papers
    you required. You equally approved my conduct, by letter
    of February 10, 1767, in communicating to the Prince de
    Masseran[276] the discovery I had made of England’s design to
    invade Mexico and Peru in the approaching war, on the plan
    devised by the Sieur Caffaro, that is to say, the Marquis
    d’Aubaret, for which he receives 600_l._ sterling per annum
    from the English ministry.... You also approved, by letter of
    September 23, 1769, my vigilance in giving you eight months’
    notice of the naval expedition projected by Russia against
    the Turks, and of which you were a witness. His Majesty, as
    also the King of England, deigned to approve my conduct in
    the affair of Dr. Musgrave on the subject of the peace, which
    created so great a sensation in London in 1769 and 1770. I
    will not worry you by entering into particulars on the various
    testimonies of approbation you have deigned to give me, on
    behalf of his Majesty, as to my zeal in keeping you informed
    of interesting events that have already occurred, that are now
    passing, and are yet to take place.

    ‘It is time, after the cruel loss we have experienced of our
    Counsellor-in-Chief[277] at Versailles, who, in the midst of
    his own court, had less power than a king’s advocate at the
    Châtelet; who, through incredible weakness, ever suffered his
    faithless servants to triumph over his secret servants who
    were true to him, and who had ever more largely favoured his
    declared enemies rather than his real friends; it is time, I
    say, that you should inform the new King, who loves truth,
    and of whom it is said that he is as firm as his illustrious
    grandfather was weak; it is time, for us both, that you should
    inform this young monarch of your having been the secret
    minister of Louis XV. during upwards of twenty years, and of
    my having been under-minister, under his orders and yours; that
    during the last twelve years I have sacrificed my fortune,
    advancement, and happiness, in desiring to obey, to the
    letter, his secret order of June 3, 1763,[278] and the secret
    instructions relating thereto;’ ...

that for particular reasons, known only to the late King, he thought it
his duty to sacrifice him, openly, to the wrath of his ambassador de
Guerchy, to that of his ministers, and to the hysterics of de Pompadour;
but that his sense of justice and kindness of heart had never, in secret,
allowed him to abandon him, but that he had, on the contrary, given him,
in his own hand his royal promise to reward and justify him in the future.

    ‘... Posterity could never believe in these facts, had not you
    and I all the necessary documents to establish them, together
    with others still more incredible.... Had the late good King
    not expelled the Jesuits from his kingdom, and had he a
    Caramuel or a Malagrida for his confessor, nobody would have
    been surprised; but, thank God, I hope the new King will soon
    deliver you and me out of our embarrassments. I trust that no
    Jesuit will ever be his confessor, friend, or minister, whether
    he be disguised as priest, chancellor, duke and peer, courtier
    or courtesan.’[279]

De Broglio had said much more in his favour to Louis XVI. than he chose
to tell D’Eon, and he now conveyed to him the King’s desire that he
should continue to make his reports in cypher, addressing all such
communications to the Count de Vergennes.




CHAPTER XIII.

    The Count de Broglio’s offers for the surrender of the King’s
    papers—D’Eon’s conditions—Failure of the transaction—Proposal
    of marriage to (Mademoiselle) D’Eon—Beaumarchais—The Madame
    Dubarry scandal—De Vergennes’ instructions to Beaumarchais—That
    minister’s high opinion of D’Eon—Beaumarchais’ success in
    treating with D’Eon.


So far as the ministers were concerned, the Chevalier D’Eon was regarded
in the light of a rebel and traitor, when all of which he could have
stood convicted was, like poor Clinker, ‘hunger, wretchedness, and
want; but de Broglio and the King knew otherwise. The compromising
papers with the existence of which we have become so familiar, were
still in his possession, and their immediate recovery having become
an absolute necessity, the count was directed to arrange in a kindly
and generous spirit for their surrender. He accordingly sent to London
the Marquis de Prunevaux, an officer of distinction and a kinsman of
the Duke de Nivernois, to propose the following conditions:—D’Eon to
give up every document relating to the late King’s private or official
correspondence; to give his word of honour to abstain, ever thereafter,
from writing anything of a nature likely to awaken the recollections of
his contentions with de Guerchy and de Praslin, and to avoid all such
places where he would be liable to meet the Countess de Guerchy and her
children. In return, he should receive a life-pension of twelve thousand
livres,[280] have his military rank restored to him, all charges
pending against him should be withdrawn, and a safe conduct signed by
the King granted, enabling him to return to France and live in any part
of the country most agreeable to himself. But D’Eon had lost his beloved
master, whose slightest wish had ever been a law to him; he knew that
his occupation was gone, but he thought he might recover the position
he had lost if he played his cards well, and accordingly rejected the
terms, substituting his own instead, in which he asked—(1) that his
conduct should be purged of the calumnies imputed to it by the Duke de
Praslin and the Count de Guerchy, and that he should be reinstated in the
diplomatic rank and title he had held, as was done to the celebrated La
Chalotais;[281] and (2) that all sums and indemnities due to him during
the past twenty-one years, amounting altogether to 13,933_l._ sterling,
or 318,477 livres, should be paid to him in full.

In urging his claims to a sum of such large proportions, the Chevalier’s
argument was a repetition of what he had advanced in days gone by, when
soliciting Louis XV. and de Broglio for pecuniary assistance:—

    ‘All the debts I have contracted in England are the natural
    consequences of the orders I received from the King being
    contradictory to those of the Duke de Praslin; a natural
    consequence of the means to which I had recourse in defence of
    my honour and of my life; a natural consequence of the measures
    I adopted to prevent my person and papers from being carried
    off out of England, and a natural consequence of the criminal
    proceedings I was obliged to institute against the late Count
    de Guerchy, for having poisoned me at his table, and for having
    ordered and bribed de Vergy to assassinate me in London; also
    for having sought to kidnap me—all atrocious crimes of which I
    adduced proofs at the trial, notwithstanding the indignation
    of the French Court, notwithstanding the presence of the
    ambassador, who owed his escape from the punishment he richly
    merited simply to a _nolle prosequi_ mercifully granted by the
    King of England, in answer to his supplication, and to the
    everlasting disgrace of the said ambassador.’[282]

[Sidenote: NEGOTIATORS NONPLUSSED.]

De Prunevaux remonstrated that the sum demanded was prodigious.

    ‘Prodigious for you,’ replied D’Eon, ‘who insist on crown
    pieces doing duty in a country where guineas are fingered!
    Prodigious in your native Morvan, where a horse costs two
    louis, an ox six livres, and an ass a crown; but as for me, I
    have been living for the last thirteen years in London, where a
    turkey costs six livres before it is roasted!’

Notwithstanding a four months’ residence in London, De Prunevaux could
not prevail upon the Chevalier to leave England, for he insisted, after
the example of the brave and virtuous La Chalotais, on a temporary
re-establishment in his post of plenipotentiary which he occupied with
distinction, and from which Madame de Pompadour, with a cabal of the
great, by little and base intrigues expelled him; deeming all pecuniary
satisfaction beneath his honour, gold being but a means and not the
object of great souls.[283]

De Broglio’s friendly remonstrances and reproaches were without effect
upon D’Eon, who became the more obdurate from the moment that de
Prunevaux resolutely, and once for all, refused to entertain any such
idea as his reinstatement to his former official position. De Prunevaux
was succeeded by Captain Pommereux of the Grenadiers, ordered to treat
with D’Eon on the basis of an indemnity; but the only concession the
Chevalier would make being to reduce his claim to 256,000 livres, de
Vergennes submitted to the King that since a high sum was still persisted
in, it would be unwise to underrate the importance of keeping on good
terms with the Chevalier, and recommended that for the present, at least,
his quarterly allowance should be paid as before, anticipating that
he would become more tractable with time, and if less importance were
attached to the recovery of the papers of which he was the depositary.
Louis XVI. approved, but said that he had never read a more impertinent
or ridiculous letter than D’Eon’s,[284] and were it not for the safety of
the documents, he should certainly send him about his business.[285] I
cannot conclude this paragraph without noticing that the gallant captain
became so thoroughly persuaded, during his stay in London, of the truth
of the reports on the presumed sex of the Chevalier, that he became
enamoured of the heroine, and actually proposed marriage before taking
his departure for France!

[Sidenote: THE DUBARRY SCANDAL]

There now appears on the scene a remarkable man, one who, relying upon
his abilities, of which he was singularly vain, was prepared to act as
mediator, and by pursuing a policy of something like oppression, bring
D’Eon to his bearings. This was no less an individual than Beaumarchais,
the watchmaker’s apprentice, lieutenant-general of the royal hunt,
champion of the Americans in revolt against Britain, and in the secret
service of Louis XVI., but more universally known, perhaps, as the author
of ‘Le Barbier de Seville,’ a play first published with the authority of
that sovereign, and unjustly condemned for a season as being a plagiary
on Molière’s ‘École des Femmes.’ When D’Eon and Beaumarchais met for the
first time, the latter was in London on a mission from the King, in which
D’Eon was likewise concerned, and it is scarcely to be doubted he was
under instructions from de Vergennes to make the Chevalier’s acquaintance
with a view to entering eventually into further relations with him. By
Beaumarchais’ management were shaped the destinies of D’Eon, who has
left a record of how they met and what their intercourse, in a written
statement he addressed to the Count de Vergennes, on May 27, 1776,[286]
and from which we quote the following passages:—

    ‘There was in 1773, and there still is, in England, a libelling
    adventurer named Théveneau de Morande, the counterpart of
    the Sieur Goudard described by me elsewhere. He had set up a
    newspaper called “Le Gazetier Cuirassé,” a sort of laboratory
    for defamation of character, in which he abused everybody and
    dealt in slander. Before printing “Le Gazetier Cuirassé,” he
    wrote to all those persons (including M. de Voltaire) whom it
    was his intention to defame, to demand a certain sum of money
    if they did not wish such abominations to be made public. The
    Marquis de Villette, one of those to whom he had written,
    replied:—

    ‘“You scoundrel! You demand fifty louis that you may not
    publish certain facts in which I am concerned; if you give me
    one hundred, I will supply you with many other facts far more
    curious and private, which you can add to your manuscript. I
    await your answer.”

    ‘2. In a letter dated July 6, 1773, Louis XV. and his secret
    minister, the Count de Broglio, instructed the Chevalier D’Eon
    to find out whether M. de Morande was really at work on “Notes
    on the Life of Madame la Comtesse Dubarry,”[287] and what sum
    would suffice to induce M. de Morande to give up his MS. and
    the publication of it.’

To which the Chevalier D’Eon replied, under date of July 13-18, 1773:—

    ‘You could not have recourse to anybody more able to assist
    and bring to a satisfactory termination the affair you have
    mentioned to me, M. Morande being a countryman of mine, who
    boasts of being connected with a branch of my family in
    Burgundy.... For two months I refused to make his acquaintance
    for very good reasons. He has so frequently called since,
    that I have occasionally received him rather than be annoyed
    by a young man of an exceedingly turbulent and impetuous
    disposition, who knows no bounds, and without any respect for
    things sacred or profane. Such is the man.... _Fœnum habet in
    cornu, tu Romane, caveto._ This is why I keep him at a certain
    distance....

    ‘He is a man who swindles several rich people in Paris through
    fear of his pen. He has produced the most outrageous libel
    it is possible to conceive against the Count de Lauraguais,
    with whom he picked a quarrel. The King of England (himself so
    frequently attacked in the papers) asked, with reference to
    this affair, what he thought of English liberty.’

    ‘I have nothing to complain of, Sire,’ replied the count, ‘it
    treats me like a King.’

    ‘I am not aware that Morande is at work on the scandalous
    account of the Dubarry family; but I have very strong
    suspicions that such is the case. If it should be so, there
    is nobody in a better position than I am to negotiate for
    its being relinquished; he is very fond of his wife, and I
    undertake to get her to do anything I wish.... I believe that
    if he were offered 800 guineas he would be quite satisfied. I
    know that he is in want of money just now, and I will do my
    best to arrange for a smaller sum. But, sir, to tell you the
    truth, I should be delighted if the money were given to him by
    some other person, so that nobody will suppose that I have
    made a single guinea by such a business.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘3. M. D’Eon is on the point of concluding the bargain in
    consideration of the sum of 800_l._ sterling, M. Morande giving
    his bond that he will pay 1,000_l._ sterling to the poor of the
    parish, should he hereafter be convicted before a tribunal, of
    having caused to be printed any work to the prejudice of the
    late King, of his mistresses or ministers.’

    ‘4. M. D’Eon receives another letter from the Count de Broglio,
    dated August 26, 1773, approved by the King, in which he is
    instructed to suspend his negotiations with Morande, seeing
    that the celebrated Count Dubarry had taken other measures; but
    he is to watch Morande and his publications.’

    ‘5. Secret emissaries of police arrive in London for the
    purpose of kidnapping Morande. The scheme fails, and the
    frightened emissaries promptly make their escape to Paris.’

    ‘6. Under censure of the Parliament of Paris, Beaumarchais is
    on the point of being arrested, when he takes refuge in the
    King’s wardrobe, an asylum worthy of such a personage.’

    ‘7. M. de la Borde, the late King’s valet-de-chambre,[288]
    confides to Beaumarchais, in the gloom of the wardrobe, that
    the King’s heart is saddened by a rascally libel on the amours
    of the charming Dubarry, in the course of being written in
    London by the scoundrel Morande.’

    ‘8. ... The Sieur Caron entertains hope of success in fawning
    to his master’s love affairs, humbling his enemies and
    increasing his own fortune. He communicates to la Borde his
    design of going to London, and secretly bribing with gold the
    already corrupted Morande. This project is communicated by la
    Borde to Louis XV., who deigns to give his approval.’

    ‘9. Accordingly, Beaumarchais arrives in London _incognito_,
    escorted by the Count de Lauraguais _in publico_.’

    ‘10. The day of their arrival, Morande calls on M. D’Eon to
    inform him that two French noblemen had been to see him that
    morning, with their pockets full of gold, to invite him to
    suppress his work against the Countess Dubarry; but not wishing
    to conclude any arrangement without first consulting M. D’Eon,
    who was the first to commence negotiations on this business,
    the two noblemen had remained in their coach at the corner of
    the street, and desired to confer with him.’

    ‘11. M. D’Eon asks Morande the names of these two French
    noblemen, and whether they bring letters to him from Versailles
    or Paris.... Morande declares they wish to preserve the
    strictest incognito.’

    ‘12. M. D’Eon replies that he has no wish to confer with
    unknown individuals; they might be emissaries of police who
    would induce him to say what he would rather leave unsaid;
    that the love affairs of kings were ticklish matters to meddle
    in.... The only advice he could offer to Morande, encumbered as
    he is with a wife and family and debts, in so expensive a place
    as London, and pursuing a dangerous avocation comparable to
    that of a highwayman, would be to exact the largest sum out of
    the richest gilt coach he might meet. His own coach could only
    offer 800_l._ sterling for the suppression of the libel....’

    ‘13. A few days later, M. D’Eon learns that the two unknown
    nobles are, the unknown noble, Caron de Beaumarchais, and the
    most illustrious and well-known noble, Louis François Brancas,
    Count de Lauraguais, and that they had concluded an agreement
    with Théveneau de Morande, in the name of Louis XV., for the
    suppression of his libel in consideration of the sum of 1,500
    louis, in cash, and a life-pension of 4,000 francs, to be
    reduced to a life-pension of 2,000 livres in favour of his
    wife, should she survive him....’[289]

    ‘14. Morande not ceasing to trouble M. D’Eon with his obtrusive
    visits, the latter was induced to tell him that he was curious
    to make the acquaintance of such a man as Beaumarchais, because
    the papers he had published gave him reason to suppose, judging
    by the boldness of his style and opinions, that there was still
    a man left in Paris.’

    ‘15. ... Morande brought him to my house when he came to London
    for the third time, and thus we saw each other, led no doubt
    by a curiosity natural to extraordinary animals to meet one
    another.’

    ‘16. In May, 1775, I saw this rake whom I might call, without
    offence, by the name of that animal who with his eyes turned
    up, and his snout to the ground, searches for truffles in my
    country. After several interviews and conferences, he became
    acquainted with some of the circumstances of my political and
    physical condition.’

    ‘17. He was profuse in his offers to be of service at
    Versailles, and I accepted. Like a drowning man abandoned, so
    to say, by the late King and his private minister for high
    reasons of state, to the current of an infected river, I hung
    on for an instant to the boat of Caron as I would to a red-hot
    rod of iron. Although I took the precaution to protect my hands
    with gauntlets, I had my fingers burnt after all....’

[Sidenote: BEAUMARCHAIS’ HEART TOUCHED.]

According to Loménie,[290] D’Eon _solicited the assistance of
Beaumarchais_, and that he might the more effectively enlist his
sympathies, confessed to him, with tears, that he was a female, which,
never doubting, and delighted at the prospect of obliging a woman become
interesting by her daring courage, political talents and misfortunes, and
wishing also to bring to a successful issue a somewhat difficult task,
Beaumarchais wrote some touching words to Louis XVI. in favour of his
client.

    ‘When it is considered that this creature, so persecuted, is of
    a sex to which all is forgiven, the heart is moved with sweet
    compassion.... I venture to assure you, Sire, that in treating
    this wonderful creature with tact and gentleness, even though
    she be soured by twelve years of misfortune, she will be easily
    prevailed upon to submit herself, and give up the whole of the
    late King’s papers on reasonable conditions.’

Having familiarised himself with D’Eon’s story, his difficulties and
necessities, Beaumarchais returned to Versailles, and exaggerating the
importance of the hidden secret correspondence, although he had not
seen any of it, pleaded the cause of his new client, and secured for
himself the congenial employment of treating for the King’s papers by
instructions contained in a letter from the Count de Vergennes, in which
allusion is made for the first time to the Chevalier’s change of sex,
although spoken of throughout in the masculine gender.

    ‘... You have the King’s authority to agree to every reasonable
    guarantee upon which M. D’Eon may insist, for the regular
    payment of his pension of 12,000 livres, on the understanding,
    however, that he will not claim an annuity to that amount when
    out of France; the capital to be devoted to the realisation of
    this sum is not at my disposition, and I shall experience much
    difficulty in obtaining it; but it is easy enough to convert
    the pension into a life-annuity, of which the title-deed would
    be given up. The liquidation of debts will be a difficult
    matter, M. D’Eon’s claims in this respect being very great, and
    he must reduce them considerably to enable us to come to terms.
    As you are not to allow it to appear that you are sent to him
    on a mission, you will enjoy the advantage of his having to
    wait upon you, and you will thus be in a position to dictate
    terms. M. D’Eon is of a violent disposition, but I believe him
    to be an honest fellow, and I will do him the justice to say
    that I am quite persuaded he is incapable of treachery. It is
    impossible for M. D’Eon to take leave of the King of England;
    the disclosure of his sex renders such a thing impracticable;
    it would be casting ridicule upon the two Courts ... a
    certificate will be granted, provided he remains satisfied
    with the praise that his zeal, intelligence, and loyalty have
    merited; but we cannot compliment him on his moderation and
    submission, and in no case must there be any allusion to his
    disputes with M. de Guerchy. You are an enlightened man, and
    I have no misgivings that you will make a good bargain with
    D’Eon, if such a thing is to be done at all. If you fail, then
    we must take it for granted that we cannot expect to meet
    with success, and make up our minds for the worst. Our first
    feelings will be disagreeable, but the consequences will be
    terrible to D’Eon. It is very humiliating to an exile to turn
    traitor. He becomes an object of contempt.’[291]

[Sidenote: STILL APPRECIATED.]

Even though the Count de Vergennes was thus engaged in determining the
final disposal of D’Eon, such was the opinion continued to be entertained
of his devotion to his country, of his abilities and usefulness, that
we see him recommended by that minister to the new French ambassador in
London, as being a _man_ fully competent to obtain information of which
they stood in need, and this at a time that France was still guided by
a feeling of hostility towards the rebels against British authority in
America.

    _The Count de Vergennes to the Count de Guines._

                                         ‘Versailles, June 23, 1775.

    ‘... You will be good enough not to neglect any opportunity for
    assuring his Britannic Majesty of the King’s sentiments towards
    him, and his wish for the establishment of the most perfect
    understanding between them as sovereigns, on the basis of the
    peace and friendship that so happily exists. The principles of
    moderation and justice by which the King is constantly guided,
    and which directs him in all his resolutions, should serve to
    reassure his Britannic Majesty on the nature of our views,
    sought to be misrepresented by the enemies to public peace.
    Far from desiring to take advantage of England’s difficulties
    under the present aspect of affairs in America, we would rather
    be able to assist in extricating her. The spirit of revolt,
    wherever it may break out, is always a dangerous example.
    There are mental as well as physical maladies, and both may
    become contagious.... We have no wish to carry our precautions
    to such a point as to alarm the English. I request that you
    will keep a strict watch over the changes we may expect to
    see, and especially over what Lord Chatham might effect on the
    mind of the King of England, should he yield, as reported, to
    the solicitations of that prince for the purpose of drawing
    him towards himself. Perhaps M. D’Eon will be able to procure
    for you some interesting information on this subject. If you
    believe in the possibility of entertaining direct relations
    with him, I know that he will not refuse to be of service to
    you. His heart is ever French, although his misfortunes and
    hasty temperament seem sometimes to have estranged him. He has
    friends in the opposition, which is by no means a bad channel
    for obtaining information.’[292]

To resume. Beaumarchais’ earliest success consisted in obtaining from
the Chevalier the keys of an iron safe said to contain the King’s secret
papers, and which Lord Ferrers was supposed to hold as security from
D’Eon for the loan of five thousand pounds.

    ‘... I place at your disposal, Captain D’Eon, a brave officer,
    an accomplished diplomatist, and possessing all the virile
    qualities of manhood so far as his head is concerned. I bring
    to the King the keys of an iron safe securely sealed with my
    own seal, and in safe deposit, and containing all the papers
    it is necessary for the King to have. It is thus that I
    served the late King in the case of another exile whose pen
    was dreaded.[293] At any rate, the King and you may remain
    perfectly well assured that matters in England will remain _in
    statu quo_ during my absence, when completing with you the task
    I have commenced with D’Eon.... I take advantage of the first
    sure opportunity for having a letter posted at Calais to inform
    you, without its being known in London, that I have placed in
    the King’s hands certain papers, and an individual whom it was
    sought, at any price, to employ against him ... people are
    curiously inquiring what I am doing here!...’[294]

[Sidenote: SUBMISSION!]

The letter intimating to Beaumarchais, for the first time, that D’Eon
should, in the future, be considered a female, was succeeded two months
later by another ministerial despatch, in which allusion is made, also
for the first time, to the necessity for his complete change of sex by
the assumption of female attire; the Count de Vergennes, as will be
noticed, still referring to the Chevalier by employing the personal
pronoun of the masculine gender.

    ‘... However great my desire to see, to know, and to converse
    with M. D’Eon, I do not conceal from you that I have one
    cause for anxiety. His enemies are on the alert, and will not
    easily forgive him for all he has said of them. Should he come
    here, however prudent and circumspect he may be, they might
    impute to him conduct in opposition to the reserve imposed by
    the King; denials and justifications are always embarrassing
    and odious to the well-meaning. Should M. D’Eon consent to
    disguise himself, all would be well; it is a proposition that
    can emanate from himself alone; but in his own interest it is
    desirable that he should avoid, at least for some years, a
    residence in France and necessarily in Paris. You may make such
    use of these observations as you think proper.’[295]

Having displayed his keys at Versailles, and assured de Vergennes
that four days would suffice to regulate affairs finally with D’Eon,
Beaumarchais returned to London, the first step he took being to inform
the Chevalier, in the clearest terms, that as the primary condition of
all future negotiations it was absolutely necessary she should agree
to resuming female attire. D’Eon became very noisy upon receiving
intimation for which he was so little prepared, and persistently refused
to assent; but the determined attitude and dictatorial bearing assumed by
Beaumarchais were not without effect, and for the first time in his life,
perhaps, he quailed, and in the end, yielded.

    ‘All this has afforded me the opportunity for becoming better
    acquainted with the creature with whom I have to deal ... the
    feeling of resentment against the late ministers and their
    friends of thirty years’ standing is so strong in her, that
    too great a barrier cannot be placed between the contenders.
    Written promises to be prudent do not suffice to keep in
    check one whose blood boils at the simple mention of Guerchy.
    The positive declaration of her sex, and her promise to live
    for ever after in female attire, will be the only means of
    putting an end for the future to all kind of clamour and its
    consequences. I have been resolute in exacting this, and have
    succeeded.’[296]




CHAPTER XIV.

    D’Eon surrenders the King’s papers—Earl Ferrers’ share in their
    custody—Covenant between Beaumarchais and D’Eon, who receives
    permission to return to France—and is ordered to resume female
    attire.


The next few weeks were employed in arranging the terms of that Covenant
by which D’Eon irrevocably bound himself to renounce his style as a man,
and appear for ever thereafter in the character of a female, that being
the sex to which he more properly belonged. During this interval also
the iron safe was opened, and its contents declared by Beaumarchais to
be far from meriting the importance attached to them. D’Eon insisted,
on the contrary, that they were very precious, including, as they did,
the earliest instructions supplied to the Duke de Nivernois on his
proceeding to England; the earliest despatches of that minister giving
the secret details of the negotiations for peace; and the family pact of
the House of Bourbon, together with the secret convention—the whole of
which were made up into four bundles; but he admitted that the papers of
the greatest consequence were not in the iron safe at all. To produce
these he took Beaumarchais to his residence, led him into his bedroom,
and from beneath the flooring withdrew four parcels securely sealed and
directed: _Secret papers to be given to the King only_, which, he avowed,
completed the collection. D’Eon then drew up a list of the whole, in
detail, Beaumarchais affixing his initials and a numeral to each sheet as
he hastily perused it.

In conferring with Lord Ferrers, whose name appeared on D’Eon’s list
as one of his principal creditors, Beaumarchais shrewdly observed that
either the debt owed to him was imaginary, or his debtor had been
imposing upon him, by obtaining large sums of money on the security of
papers held to be of considerable importance, but which papers had never
really been consigned to him, they having been concealed in his own
residence. To this Lord Ferrers replied that he regretted Beaumarchais
should seek to create a breach between his friend the Chevalier and
himself—he little cared to which sex he belonged—as he valued him for
the spirit he showed and for his virtues. He had not been deceived, he
said, on the nature of the papers in the iron safe, represented to have
been State papers, and having seen the inventory of them, signed by
Beaumarchais himself, he was more than ever convinced of the Chevalier’s
honesty and truthfulness, such papers being all he could have desired as
security for his money. Even had his creditor died, he might have easily
recovered what was owed to him, for the Court of France, or at any rate,
the British Court, would have paid ten times the sum he claimed, rather
than that publicity should be given to their contents. He was surprised,
he added, at the dishonourable treatment by the French Court and its
ministers of so extraordinary a person as the Chevalier D’Eon, who had
worthily served his country, and yet had been so badly used.

Defending himself against the charge of having deceived Lord Ferrers,
D’Eon says:—

    ‘M. de Beaumarchais makes me aver, upon his own private
    authority, what I never thought of or said. When I deposited
    the iron safe with his lordship he never even asked to see the
    outside coverings of the papers. He trusted entirely to my word
    when I declared to him that it contained State papers, and the
    detailed list signed by M. de Beaumarchais has proved to his
    lordship that I told the truth.... I know how to conduct myself
    abroad, and especially amongst the natural enemies of France,
    with the prudence and policy acquired by long experience and
    a residence of twenty-two years in foreign lands. Mine was
    consequently an act of wisdom and prudence, in not revealing
    to an admiral, an English peer allied to the royal family, the
    fact of my holding secret correspondence with the King, and
    that the said voluminous correspondence was hidden beneath the
    flooring of my bed-chamber. It was for me alone to know this,
    and that the papers were near a mine of gunpowder which would
    have blown all into the air had any attempt been made to drive
    me out of my last retrenchment. How can M. de Beaumarchais
    distinguish by the name of deceit the reticence I have
    necessarily observed towards everybody except himself, coming
    to me as he did, in behalf of the King and of his minister?
    Should he not rather blush at having betrayed to an English
    nobleman, through a feeling of revenge, my secret, which was
    that of the late King, who commanded me not to breathe a word
    thereon to any living soul? But M. de Beaumarchais thinks that
    all secrets, even the most important of State secrets, are but
    green-room secrets.’[297]

[Sidenote: BEAUMARCHAIS’ COVENANT WITH D’EON.]

In the Covenant[298] between Beaumarchais and D’Eon, settling the terms
for the surrender of the King’s papers, and the return of the latter to
France, the emendations and alterations, as they appear in footnotes, are
written in the Chevalier’s hand.

    ‘We, the undersigned, Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais,
    specially entrusted with the private instructions of the King
    of France, dated Versailles, August 25, 1775, communicated to
    the Chevalier D’Eon in London, and of which a copy certified
    by me shall be annexed to the present act—on the one part:

[Sidenote: STIPULATIONS IN THE COVENANT.]

    ‘And Demoiselle Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée
    D’Eon de Beaumont, spinster of age, hitherto known by the name
    of the Chevalier D’Eon, squire, formerly captain of dragoons,
    knight of the royal and military order of Saint Louis,
    aide-de-camp to Marshal the Duke and to the Count de Broglio,
    minister plenipotentiary from France at the Court of Great
    Britain, late doctor of civil law and of canon law, advocate
    in the Parliament of Paris, Censor Royal for history and
    _belles-lettres_; sent to Russia with the Chevalier Douglas for
    effecting the reconciliation of the two Courts, secretary of
    Embassy to the Marquis de l’Hôpital, ambassador plenipotentiary
    from France at the Court of her Imperial Majesty of all the
    Russias, and secretary of Embassy to the Duke de Nivernois,
    ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary from France to
    England for the conclusion of the late peace, are agreed upon
    what follows, and have subscribed our names:

    ‘Art I. That I, Caron de Beaumarchais, do require, in the
    name of the King, that all official and private papers having
    reference to the several political negotiations with which
    the Chevalier D’Eon has been entrusted in England, notably
    those concerning the peace of 1763, correspondence, minutes,
    copies of letters, cyphers, &c., at present deposited with Lord
    Ferrers, Earl, Peer, and Admiral, of Upper Seymour Street,
    Portman Square, London, ever a particular friend of the said
    Chevalier D’Eon in the course of his troubles and law-suits in
    England, that the said papers, enclosed in a large iron safe
    of which I have the key, be delivered to me after having been
    initialled by me and by the said Chevalier D’Eon, and of which
    the inventory shall be added and annexed to the present act, as
    a proof that the said papers have been faithfully delivered.

    ‘Art. II. That all papers of the secret correspondence between
    the Chevalier D’Eon, the late King, and the several persons
    entrusted by his Majesty to entertain that correspondence,
    designated in the letters by the names _deputy_, _solicitor_,
    in the same way in which his Majesty himself was styled
    the _counsellor_—which secret correspondence was concealed
    beneath the flooring of the bed-chamber of the said Chevalier
    D’Eon, whence it was withdrawn by him, on October 5 of the
    present year, in my presence alone, being carefully sealed
    and addressed, _To the King only, at Versailles_—That all the
    copies of the said letters, minutes, the cyphers, &c., shall be
    delivered to me, equally attested with initials, and with an
    exact inventory, the said secret correspondence consisting of
    five portfolios or thick volumes in quarto.

    ‘Art. III. That the said Chevalier D’Eon is to desist from
    every kind of proceeding, judicial or personal, against the
    memory of the late Count de Guerchy, his adversary, the
    successors to his title, the members of his family, &c.,
    and undertakes never to revive any such proceedings under
    whatsoever form, unless he be forced thereto by judicial or
    personal provocation on the part of some relative, friend, or
    adherent of that family; for which there can be no longer any
    apprehension, his Majesty having, in his wisdom, taken every
    necessary precaution to prevent the recurrence, in the future,
    of any such unseemly quarrels, whether on the one side or on
    the other.

    ‘Art. IV. And to the end that an insurmountable barrier be
    for ever raised between the contending parties, and that
    all ideas of law-suits or personal quarrels, no matter
    whence they arise, be permanently nullified, I require,
    in the name of his Majesty, that the disguise which has
    to this day enabled a female to pass for the Chevalier
    D’Eon, shall entirely cease, and without seeking to blame
    Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée D’Eon
    de Beaumont for a concealment of condition and sex, the
    responsibility of which rests entirely with her relatives,[299]
    and whilst rendering justice to the prudent, decorous, and
    circumspect conduct she has at all times observed in the
    dress of her adoption whilst preserving a manly and vigorous
    bearing; I require, absolutely, that the ambiguity of her
    sex, which has afforded inexhaustible material for gossip,
    indecent betting, and idle jesting liable to be renewed,
    especially in France, which his pride would not tolerate,
    and which would give rise to fresh quarrels that could only
    serve, perhaps, to palliate and renew former ones; I require,
    absolutely, I say, in the name of the King, that the phantom
    Chevalier D’Eon shall entirely disappear, and that the public
    mind shall for ever be set at rest by a distinct, precise,
    and unambiguous declaration, publicly made, of the true sex
    of Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée D’Eon de
    Beaumont before she returns to France—her resumption of female
    attire settling for ever the public mind with regard to her;
    with all of which she should the more readily comply just
    now,[300] considering how interesting she will appear to both
    sexes, all being in like manner honoured by the incidents of
    her life, her courage, and her talents. Upon which conditions
    I will deliver to her the safe-conduct on parchment, signed by
    the King and his Minister for Foreign Affairs, which allows
    her to return to France and there remain under the special and
    immediate protection of his Majesty, who is desirous not only
    of according protection and security under his royal word,
    but who is good enough to change the yearly pension of 12,000
    livres, granted by the late King in 1766, and which has been
    paid to her punctually to this day, into a life-annuity of the
    same amount, with an acknowledgement that the capital for the
    said annuity has already been provided and advanced by the
    said Chevalier D’Eon in furthering the concerns of the late
    King, besides other larger sums,[301] the total of which will
    be remitted by me for the liquidation of her debts in England,
    with a copy on parchment of the deed for the said annuity of
    12,000 livres tournois, dated September 28, 1775.

[Sidenote: THE CHEVALIER’S CONDITIONS.]

    ‘And I, Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée D’Eon
    de Beaumont, spinster of age, hitherto known as the Chevalier
    D’Eon as above styled, submit to the whole of the above
    conditions imposed in the name of the King, solely that I
    may afford to his Majesty the greatest possible proofs of my
    respect and submission, although it would have been far more
    agreeable to me had he deigned to employ me again in his army
    or in the diplomatic service, in compliance with my earnest
    solicitations and in accordance with my seniority—And because,
    excepting some exhibition of feeling rendered in a measure
    excusable from a legitimate and natural desire to defend
    oneself, and the most justifiable resentment, his Majesty is
    pleased to allow that, as an officer, I have always behaved
    with bravery, and that I have been a laborious, intelligent,
    and discreet political agent.

    ‘I submit to declaring publicly my sex, to my condition
    being established beyond a doubt, to resume and wear female
    attire[302] until death, unless, taking into consideration my
    being so long accustomed to appear in uniform, his Majesty
    will consent, on sufferance only, to my resuming male attire
    should it become impossible for me to endure the embarrassment
    of adopting the other, after having tried to accustom myself
    to it at the _abbaye-royale_ of the Bernardine ladies of
    Saint-Antoine-des-Champs, Paris, or at any such other convent
    as I might select, to which I wish to withdraw for some months
    on arriving in France.

    ‘I declare that I entirely relinquish all proceedings, judicial
    or personal, to the prejudice of the late Count de Guerchy and
    of his successors, promising never to renew them unless forced
    to such a step by judicial proceedings as above stated.

    ‘I further pledge my word of honour, that I will deliver to M.
    Caron de Beaumarchais all official and secret papers, whether
    concerning the Embassy or the above said secret correspondence,
    without reserving or retaining to myself a single document,
    upon the following conditions, to which I entreat his Majesty’s
    approval:—

    ‘“1. Seeing that the letter of the late King, my most honoured
    lord and master, dated Versailles, April 1, 1766, by which
    he insured to me the annual pension of 12,000 livres until
    such time as he should improve my position, is of no further
    service to me so far as the said pension is concerned, which
    has been changed, to my advantage, by the King his successor,
    into a life-annuity of like amount—That the original letter
    should remain in my possession as testimony of the honour the
    late King deigned to bestow on my loyalty, my innocence, and
    my irreproachable conduct during all my troubles, and in all
    matters he deigned to confide to me, whether in Russia, whilst
    serving in his army, or in England.

    ‘“2. That the original receipt given to me in London on
    July 11, 1766, by M. Durand, minister plenipotentiary in
    England,[303] in exchange for the secret order of the late
    King, dated Versailles, June 3, 1763, delivered by me to him,
    intact, and of my own free-will, shall remain in my possession,
    as authentic testimony of the complete submission with which I
    gave up the secret order in the own hand of the King my master,
    which of itself justified the course of my conduct in England,
    so often described as being obstinacy by my enemies, and which,
    in their ignorance of my extraordinary situation in relation to
    the King, they have even dared to qualify as high treason.

    ‘“3. That his Majesty will deign, as a special favour, to
    satisfy himself at the expiration of every six months, as did
    the late King, of my being alive and of my whereabouts, to
    prevent my enemies from ever again being tempted to undertake
    anything to the prejudice of my honour, my liberty, my person,
    and my life.

    ‘“4. That the cross of Saint Louis, won by me at the peril of
    my life, in combats, sieges, and battles in which I took part,
    where I was wounded, and served as aide-de-camp to the general
    and as captain of dragoons and of volunteers in Broglio’s army,
    with bravery to which all those generals under whom I served
    have borne witness, shall never be taken from me, and that the
    right to wear it on any garments I may adopt shall be conceded
    to me for life.

    ‘“And if I may be permitted to add a respectful demand to these
    conditions, I would venture to observe that, at the moment I
    am about to obey his Majesty in consenting to abandon for ever
    my male attire, I am entirely destitute of everything—linen,
    clothing, and apparel suited to my sex, and that I have no
    money to procure even ordinary necessaries, M. de Beaumarchais
    being well aware who is to receive the amount destined in part
    payment of my debts, and of which I do not wish to touch one
    sou. Consequently, although I have no right to expect further
    favours from his Majesty, I do not refrain from soliciting at
    his hands the gift of a sum of money for the purchase of my
    female outfit, this unexpected, extraordinary, and compulsory
    expense not being my own idea, but uniquely in obedience to his
    orders.”

[Sidenote: BEAUMARCHAIS’ CONCESSIONS.]

    ‘And I, Caron de Beaumarchais, still as above styled, I leave
    with the said Demoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont the original letter
    conferring so much distinction, which the late King wrote
    to her from Versailles, April 1, 1766, when awarding her a
    pension of twelve thousand livres in acknowledgment of faithful
    services.

    ‘I further leave with her M. Durand’s original document.
    Neither of these papers can be taken from her by me without
    harshness that would ill accord with the benevolent and
    equitable intentions at present entertained by his Majesty
    towards the said Demoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont. As to the cross
    of Saint Louis, which she desires to retain with the right of
    wearing it in female attire, I must admit that, notwithstanding
    the exceeding kindness with which his Majesty has deigned to
    trust to my prudence, zeal, and intelligence in the conduct of
    this affair, I am afraid I should be exceeding my powers in
    determining so delicate a question.

    ‘Considering, on the other hand, that the cross of the royal
    and military order of Saint Louis has ever been regarded
    uniquely as the proof of, and reward for, valour, and that
    several officers who were thus decorated, having abandoned
    the military career for the church or the law, continued to
    wear on their new garments this honourable evidence that they
    had worthily performed their duties in a calling fraught with
    greater dangers; I do not think that there can be any objection
    to a like indulgence being granted to a valorous maiden who,
    having been brought up in male attire by her parents, and
    having courageously fulfilled all the perilous duties imposed
    by the profession of arms, may not have been aware of the
    impropriety of adopting the attire in which she had been
    compelled to live, until it became too late to change, and is
    therefore not in the least to blame for not having done so
    until now.

    ‘Considering, also, that the rare example offered by this
    extraordinary maiden is not likely to be followed by those
    of her sex, and can have no consequences; that had Jeanne
    d’Arc, who saved the throne and the states of Charles VII.,
    fighting in male attire, obtained during the war, as has the
    said Demoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont, some military reward or
    decoration such as the cross of Saint Louis; it does not appear
    that, her task being completed, the King would have deprived
    her of the honourable guerdon for valour when requiring her to
    resume the garments of her sex, nor that any chivalrous French
    knight would have considered the distinction as being profaned,
    because it ornamented the breast and dress of a female who, on
    the field of battle, had ever shown herself worthy of being a
    man.

    ‘I therefore venture to take it upon myself, not in the quality
    of envoy, lest I should abuse the power confided to me, but as
    a man persuaded of the rectitude of the principles I have just
    enunciated; I take it upon myself, I say, to leave with the
    Demoiselle Charles, &c. D’Eon de Beaumont the cross of Saint
    Louis, and liberty to wear it on her female attire, without,
    however, its being understood that I bind his Majesty to this
    act should he disapprove my conduct on this point; promising
    only, in the event of any difficulty arising, that I will plead
    with his Majesty in her behalf, and, if necessary, establish
    her right thereto, which I believe to be legitimate, with all
    the power of my pen and the strength of my heart.

    ‘With regard to the request made by the said Demoiselle D’Eon
    de Beaumont to the King, for a sum of money to enable her
    to procure a female outfit—although such a matter is not
    included in my instructions, I will not delay taking it into
    consideration, such an outlay being, as a fact, the necessary
    consequence of the instructions of which I am the bearer, to
    the effect that she is to assume the garments of her sex. I
    therefore allow her, for the purchase of a female outfit, a sum
    of 2,000 crowns, on condition that she will not bring away with
    her from London any of her clothing, arms, or any male apparel,
    lest the desire to wear them should at any time be stimulated
    by the sight of them. I consent to her retaining one complete
    suit of uniform of the regiment in which she has served, the
    helmet, sabre, pistols, musket and bayonet, as souvenirs of
    her past life, just as are preserved the relics of loved ones
    now no more. Everything else will be given up to me in London,
    to be sold, the proceeds to be disposed of in such way as his
    Majesty may direct.

    ‘And this act has been made out in duplicate, between
    us, Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais, and
    Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Augusta-André-Timothée D’Eon de
    Beaumont, under private seal, giving to it, on one side and the
    other, the most complete force and assent, and we have, each
    of us, affixed the seals of our arms, in London, the fifth day
    of October, 1775.[304]

                                    ‘(Signed) CARON DE BEAUMARCHAIS.
                                    ‘D’EON DE BEAUMONT.’

[Sidenote: THE KING’S WARRANTS.]

When the wording of this Covenant had been first agreed upon,
Beaumarchais went to Staunton Harold, paid a large portion of the sum
presumably owing to Lord Ferrers, then left for France, returning almost
immediately, bringing with him three warrants the production of which
was indispensable to the signing of the Covenant no longer delayed,
and effected on November 4. Those warrants, all bearing the same date,
we reproduce in full—the first confers on Beaumarchais full powers
to negotiate with D’Eon for the surrender of the official and secret
correspondence of Louis XV.—the second grants permission to D’Eon to
return to France—the third requires the Demoiselle D’Eon to reassume
female attire, the right to wear the cross of Saint Louis being at the
same time conceded to her.

    I.

    IN THE KING’S NAME.

    ‘His Majesty being informed that there are in the possession of
    the Sieur D’Eon de Beaumont sundry papers relating to secret
    negotiations and correspondence with the late King, his most
    honoured grandfather, and with some of his Ministers of State,
    and it being his Majesty’s desire that these papers should be
    withdrawn, he has to this end empowered and commissioned by
    these presents the Sieur Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais
    to proceed to London, there to discover all the documents in
    question, to withdraw them out of the hands or custody of
    whoever may have them, to take charge of them, to bring them
    to France, and to deliver them for his Majesty. His Majesty
    authorises the Sieur Caron de Beaumarchais to make all such
    arrangements and dispositions as he may deem necessary, with
    the view of enforcing all the conditions that prudence will
    suggest, for the complete execution of the commission confided
    to him, his Majesty being pleased to trust to his intelligence
    and zeal in this matter. And as assurance of his will, his
    Majesty has of his own hand signed the present order, which he
    has caused to be countersigned by me, Councillor, Secretary of
    State for his commands and finance.

    [Illustration: L.S.]

                                                             ‘LOUIS.

                                    ‘(Signed) GRAVIER DE VERGENNES.’

    ‘At Versailles, August 25, 1775.’

To a certified copy of the above warrant was appended the following
affirmation:—

    ‘And upon the 4th day of November, 1775, all minutes and the
    original ministerial correspondence during the embassage
    of the Duke de Nivernois, and during the ministry of the
    Chevalier D’Eon; the despatches, letters, memorandums, notes
    and instructions of the Dukes de Choiseul and de Praslin, and
    of the Ministers of the English Court, as well as the minutes
    of the correspondence between the Chevalier D’Eon and the King,
    Louis XV., from 1762 to 1774, have been faithfully delivered to
    me.[305]

                                            ‘CARON DE BEAUMARCHAIS.’

[Sidenote: SAFE-CONDUCT GRANTED BY LOUIS XVI.]

    II.

    IN THE KING’S NAME.

    ‘His Majesty having been pleased to cause information to
    be laid before him of the different commissions, both
    public and private, which the late King, his most honoured
    grandfather, heretofore most graciously confided for his
    service, as well in Russia as in England and other places,
    to Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée D’Eon de
    Beaumont, and of the manner in which he executed them, as
    also of the said D’Eon de Beaumont’s military service, his
    Majesty was convinced that, as an officer and as a minister,
    in politics, in war, and upon every occasion, he has given
    such indisputable proofs of attachment to his country, and
    of zeal for the King’s service, as render him worthy of the
    protection which his Majesty is pleased to grant him; and his
    said Majesty, willing that the said D’Eon de Beaumont should
    partake of his royal favour, deigns to continue the pension
    of twelve thousand livres per annum, which the late King, his
    grandfather, granted to him in 1766, and which has been paid to
    him to this day without interruption. His Majesty, moreover,
    being willing that the unhappy quarrels which broke out so
    publicly, to the scandal of Europe, should be for ever buried
    in oblivion, imposes absolute silence for the future in that
    respect, not only upon the said D’Eon de Beaumont, but also
    upon all his officers and subjects; upon this condition his
    Majesty grants permission to the said D’Eon de Beaumont to
    return into his kingdom, to remain there, and to attend to his
    affairs in full liberty, as also to choose any other country
    which he shall think proper, according to the choice given him
    by the late King, dated April 1, 1766. His Majesty, moreover,
    willing that, upon no occasion, at no time, and in no place
    whatever, the said D’Eon shall be troubled, disquieted, or
    molested in his honour, his person, or his fortune, by any
    of the ministers—past, present, or future, or by any other
    person, either about the negotiations or commissions, whether
    public or secret, with which the late King had honoured
    him, or from any other cause resulting from his quarrels,
    disputes, and law-suits, which by these presents are for ever
    abolished, as hath been said above; is pleased to grant to the
    said D’Eon de Beaumont safeguard and entire security for his
    person, and to put him under his said Majesty’s special and
    immediate protection and safeguard, charging the said D’Eon
    de Beaumont to observe the strictest silence, and to demean
    himself upon all occasions like a submissive, respectful, and
    faithful subject; and as an assurance of the authenticity of
    his royal will in this respect, his Majesty has signed this
    order and safeguard with his own hand; and in order to prevent
    all persons from pretending ignorance, hath caused it to be
    countersigned and delivered to the said D’Eon de Beaumont by
    me, Councillor, and Secretary of State for his Foreign Affairs,
    and for his commands and finances.[306]

    [Illustration: L.S.]

                                                             ‘LOUIS.

                                    ‘(Signed) GRAVIER DE VERGENNES.’

    ‘At Versailles, the 25th day of August, 1775.’

[Sidenote: ORDERS TO RESUME FEMALE ATTIRE.]

    III.

    IN THE KING’S NAME.

    ‘Demoiselle Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée
    D’Eon de Beaumont, spinster of age, hitherto known as the
    Chevalier D’Eon, formerly captain of dragoons, knight of
    the royal and military order of Saint Louis, and minister
    plenipotentiary in England, &c., is hereby required to resume
    immediately the garments of her sex, never again to lay them
    aside, and she is forbidden, under pain of disobedience, to
    reappear in France otherwise than in female attire. Upon this
    condition only, and others fully set forth in the special
    safe-conduct which we have this day granted to her, she may, in
    perfect security on my royal word, return to her own country,
    there to enjoy the freedom, the honours, favours, and benefits
    that have been accorded to her by our illustrious and most
    honoured grandfather, as well as by ourselves, in consideration
    of her military and political services, without any fear of
    molestation to her person, honour, and property by any of my
    late, present, or future ministers, or by any other person of
    whatsoever rank or quality. And his Majesty, desiring to mark
    by special favour his sense of the public and secret services,
    in war and in diplomacy, which the said Demoiselle D’Eon de
    Beaumont has had the good fortune to render during upwards of
    twenty consecutive years to the late King, his most honoured
    grandfather, decrees that the cross of his royal and military
    order of Saint Louis, won by the said Demoiselle D’Eon de
    Beaumont at the peril of her life, in combats, sieges, and
    battles in which she took part, when she was wounded and
    employed as aide-de-camp to the general, also as captain of
    dragoons and of volunteers in the army of de Broglio, with
    bravery to which all the generals under whom she has served
    have attested, shall never be taken from her, and that the
    right to wear it in female attire shall belong to her until
    death.[307] And as an assurance of the authenticity of his
    will in this respect, his Majesty has of his own hand signed
    the present order; and to prevent all persons from pretending
    ignorance, hath caused it to be countersigned and delivered
    to the said Demoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont by me, Councillor,
    Secretary of State for his Foreign Affairs, and for his
    commands and finances.[308]

    [Illustration: L.S.]

                                                             ‘LOUIS.

                                    ‘(Signed) GRAVIER DE VERGENNES.’

    ‘At Versailles, the 25th day of August, 1775.’




CHAPTER XV.

    Revival of gambling policies on D’Eon’s sex—Renewed
    protests—Admits being a female to the Count de
    Broglio—Beaumarchais a hard master—He demands final
    instructions from the King—Differences of opinion and angry
    interchange of letters.


D’Eon’s burning desire to see his beloved France was at length about
to be gratified, and as these fresh news got bruited about, the press
announced that the Chevalier had been recalled, it being the King’s
intention to load _him_ (or _her_) with honours, and that the heroine
would be shortly leaving for her native land, where the French Court was
impatient to see her. Such rumours only served to revive all the old
squabbles over the policies on his sex, and bets ran seven to four that
D’Eon was a woman and not a man,[309] which, though fairly heavy odds,
showed that there still existed a pretty strong feeling in favour of his
being a man rather than a woman. He again became the subject of numerous
objectionable proposals, advances he repelled with infinite disgust, and
which he did his best to discountenance and discourage by a protest to
which he gave the greatest possible publicity.

[Sidenote: FRESH PROTESTS.]

    ‘The Chevalier D’Eon desires, with most earnest entreaty,
    the people of England, who hitherto have testified their
    benevolence towards him, and have taken so great a part in his
    misfortunes, not to renew any policies on his sex, since the
    desire to discountenance those that were made in 1771 has
    been the principal cause of his remaining four years longer in
    England than intended. He is convinced that there are amongst
    the great in France some that abuse the perfect knowledge they
    have of his sex, so as to engage certain bankers in Paris to
    correspond with certain bankers in London. Some of those great
    men have a design, perhaps, to hurt his peace by what remains
    of their impotent revenge, and think the people of England
    would thereby become accomplices in their malice. The Chevalier
    D’Eon cannot believe it, but, whatever are the grounds for
    fresh reports, the Chevalier D’Eon publicly declares, as in
    justice he ought, that he has recently refused great sums of
    money which have been offered to him to be concerned in such
    policies; offers that he could never hear of but with the most
    sovereign contempt. He declares that he will never manifest
    his sex till such time as all policies shall be at an end. If
    that is impossible, the Chevalier D’Eon will be forced to quit
    secretly a country which he deems second to his own, as it
    has proved a bulwark against the persecution of his malicious
    enemies; and this act would be so much the more painful, as
    his Sovereign (who is as equitable as he is benevolent) has
    just rendered to him a most signal act of justice, which will
    soon be made public, as will his condition and extraordinary
    situation with respect to the late King, a situation unknown
    to this day to all the ministers and ambassadors, and to the
    public. If after a desire and declaration so formal, that same
    public will continue to deceive itself, they are entirely at
    liberty to do as they please.[310]

                                              ‘THE CHEVALIER D’EON.’

    ‘London, November 11, 1775,
    ‘32 Brewer Street, Golden Square.’

In less than a month after the appearance of this address, by which it
might be inferred that if D’Eon was anything at all he was more probably
a man than a woman, his old chief and firmest of friends, the Count
de Broglio, received his humble confession that he was not a man but
a woman—a confession that could only have been to one of the count’s
discernment and sensibility but transparent veneer over the sarcasm the
letter was intended to convey.

    ‘It is time to undeceive you. For a captain of dragoons,
    and aide-de-camp in war and politics, you have had but the
    semblance of a man. I am only a maiden who would have perfectly
    well sustained my part until death, had not politics and your
    enemies rendered me the most unfortunate of women.... You will
    admit, by the facility with which I separate myself from the
    world, that I remained in it for your sake only; and since I
    can no longer work or fight under your orders and under those
    of the marshal, your brother, I will renounce without any pain
    this deceitful world, which, however, has never deluded me,
    except in my youth so sorrowfully spent. I no longer believe it
    possible to die of grief, since I have the strength to endure
    so much. I know not how long I shall be able to sustain this
    cruel shock, as I have been confined to my bed through illness
    for the last twelvemonth.

    ‘I am respectfully, Monsieur le Comte, your most humble and
    most obedient servant (_serviteur_),

                       ‘GENEVIÈVE-LOUISE-AUGUSTE D’EON DE BEAUMONT.’

    ‘London, December 5, 1775.’

    ‘P.S.—You seemed to be astonished, Monsieur le Comte, at M. de
    Beaumarchais having meddled in my affairs; but you will cease
    to be so when you know that this has been the will of the King
    and of the Count de Vergennes, and that I had been enjoined not
    to write to anybody upon the arrangement of my affairs until
    all was settled. Everything soon will be, and very differently
    to the extraordinary propositions made by the Marquis de
    Prunevaux.’[311]

This was the last letter of any consequence addressed by D’Eon to
the Count de Broglio,[312] who gave little encouragement to his
correspondent of many years’ standing, if we except one written in 1778,
and which will be touched upon in its proper place.

[Illustration: _Facsimile of an autograph title-page in the Christie
collection of D’Eon M.S.S._]

[Sidenote: BEAUMARCHAIS’ ARTIFICE.]

Although the Covenant between Beaumarchais and D’Eon had been formally
signed, there still remained certain conditional clauses to be ratified.
Beaumarchais informed the Count de Vergennes that he had assured the lady
with whom he was in treaty, that if she were wise, discreet, silent, and
well conducted, he should give so good an account of her to the King’s
minister, and even to his Majesty himself, as to lead to the hope that he
should succeed in obtaining for her other benefits. He did not hesitate
to hold out such a promise, having a balance on hand of 41,000 livres
tournois, with which he purposed rewarding each submission she made, by
supposed concessions on the part of the King and of his minister; only,
however, as favours that were being granted, and not in satisfaction of
any claim. It was by such artifice only that he could expect to prevail,
and subdue the unruly and crafty creature. The triumph of Beaumarchais
was complete, for D’Eon, even in spite of himself, was effectively within
his grip; and he who had spent a lifetime in the direction of affairs,
and whose ambition and restlessness would never brook interposition,
became at length persuaded that his only chance in life—and yet at what
a fearful sacrifice—lay in meekly submitting to the only man who had
ever succeeded, being favoured by the most exceptional circumstances, in
daunting his rebellious spirit.

Beaumarchais again left London, taking with him upon this occasion
his prize, the iron safe, which he delivered into the custody of de
Vergennes, tendering at the same time to that minister a series of
questions for the consideration of the King, who was entreated to
insert replies in his own hand, that he might be armed with further
incontestable authority for bringing his transactions with D’Eon to a
speedy termination. The text of the original, which is preserved, was
written by Beaumarchais himself and bears his signature, ‘the replies to
each question, on the margin, being in a small, tremulous, and undecided
hand, in which the letters _t_ and _v_ are scarcely indicated—it is the
writing of the good, weak, and unhappy monarch....’

There were other questions to which Beaumarchais sought for answer, but
as they are in connection with his enterprises in the American cause, and
entirely irrelevant to our story, we pass them over.

    ‘Essential points which I entreat the Count de Vergennes to
    submit for the decision of the King, previous to my departure
    for London, this 13th day of December, 1775. The replies to be
    inserted in the margin:—

    ‘Does the King grant permission to the Demoiselle D’Eon to wear
    the cross of Saint Louis in female attire?

                                                  _In the provinces only._

    ‘Does his Majesty approve of the gift of 2,000 crowns which I
    have placed to the credit of that lady for her female outfit?

                                                                    _Yes._

    ‘If in the affirmative, does his Majesty leave to her disposal
    the whole of her male garments?

                                                     _She must sell them._

    ‘As the granting of these favours must depend upon a certain
    frame of mind I would impose for ever on the Demoiselle D’Eon,
    will his Majesty be pleased to leave me at liberty to concede
    or refuse them, as I may deem most desirable to the interests
    of his service?

                                                                    _Yes._

    ‘Since the King cannot refuse to direct his Minister for
    Foreign Affairs to furnish me with a receipt for all the papers
    I have brought to him from England, I have requested the Count
    de Vergennes to entreat his Majesty to have the goodness to add
    at the foot of the said receipt a few words _in his own hand_,
    expressive of his satisfaction at the manner in which I have
    accomplished my mission. This reward, the dearest to my heart,
    may some day prove of the greatest service to me. Should some
    powerful enemy at any time hereafter call upon me to render
    an account of my conduct in this affair, I should, with one
    hand, show him the King’s order, and with the other tender
    the certificate of my master, testifying that I executed his
    orders to his satisfaction. All extraneous interference would
    in such a case be futile, and people will be at liberty to say
    what they please, without my being called upon to offer any
    explanation or being in the least degree concerned.’

                                                                   _Good._

In countersigning this document, de Vergennes added: ‘The marginal
replies are in the King’s own hand,’ and Beaumarchais was granted a
certificate to the effect that ‘the King was entirely satisfied with the
zeal he had exhibited on this occasion, and with the intelligence and
skill displayed in accomplishing the mission entrusted to him.’[313] With
these precious papers Beaumarchais took flight for the English capital,
where he arrived on December 29.

[Sidenote: A TIFF.]

D’Eon’s action in rushing into print during the absence of Beaumarchais,
was scarcely in accordance with the stipulations of the latter that she
should preserve a discreet and silent demeanour, and he told her so. In
justification, D’Eon said he should never have thought of having recourse
to the press had not several persons, he knew well, been at some pains
to revive the policies on his sex. Leaving his chair abruptly, and
putting on his hat in a passion, Beaumarchais qualified the notice she
had inserted in the ‘Morning Post’ as a badly-worded, stupid, senseless,
and impertinent production from beginning to end—to which sentiment
D’Eon responded by also rising and putting on his hat, and terminating
the interview by saying that the negotiations and such negotiators as he
was, might go to the d——l! The next morning he hired a post-chaise, and
leaving Beaumarchais to his own devices, went to Lord Ferrers’ seat in
Leicestershire, where we shall find him for the next two months.

D’Eon had hardly left the room than Beaumarchais felt that he had gone
too far, and hastened to make some friendly advances. He was greatly
affected, he wrote, at the exhibition of feminine choler on her part, and
at the masculine terms of the compliment she had paid him. He reminded
her that she had always found him agreeable and cheerful, straightforward
and liberal in his dealings—and having said so much by way of apology,
he awaited with curiosity any explanations she might have to offer. None
came, and at the expiration of another week Beaumarchais again wrote,
to say that in whatever part of England she might be, she had had ample
time to answer his letter, and since she had not done so, he concluded
they were in future to consider themselves strangers to each other. He
was too gallant to differ with her on such a point! But she should not
fail to remember how greatly she was indebted to him for the many favours
the King had granted, and she was to beware lest she conducted herself
with ingratitude towards the King, as she had done towards himself. To
Lord Ferrers he also wrote, requesting his lordship to supply him with a
receipt in full for the money he had paid him,[314] a request, he said,
he had intended to prefer through M. D’Eon, but who suddenly disappeared
out of his sight without leaving word as to whither she had gone—and
this, simply because he had reproved her, as a matter of necessity, for
certain indiscretions committed during his, Beaumarchais’, absence.

[Sidenote: UNAVAILING REGRETS.]

Lord Ferrers replied—and we would draw attention, for future reference,
to that part of his letter we have italicised:—

    ‘I can only say that M. D’Eon arrived at Staunton on the 2nd,
    feeling very unwell, and he is so still.... I do not find that
    he has behaved ungratefully towards you, but I find that he has
    not sufficient money _to pay what he owes me_. He has told me
    of some differences of opinion with you in regard to an article
    that has appeared in the papers, on the policies made as to his
    sex, which, I hope, will not lead to any rupture between you.’

The surrender of the precious deposit which had constituted his strength
over the space of many years, and emboldened him in his seeming
insubordination and fearless demeanour towards the ministers of France,
had brought the affairs of D’Eon to a crisis, where the making or
unmaking of him for the remainder of his days depended almost entirely
upon submission to the man into whose hands was committed his destiny,
and in whom he himself pretended to confide. The Chevalier’s meekness
whilst settling terms with Beaumarchais was, it might be supposed, an
exemplification of the moral derived from La Fontaine’s fable—

    ‘Patience et longueur de temps
    Font plus que force ni que rage.’

But D’Eon’s submission was a sham, for his mind was racked with positive
pain—suffering which grew in intensity the more completely he realised
the wretchedness of his situation. He had allowed himself to be
persuaded to admit that he belonged to the female sex, and to pledge
himself to the assumption, for life, of female attire; irrevocable
facts, under pain of forfeiting the only means of existence left to
him! Yet there remained matters touching his honour in which he knew he
should never be able to vindicate himself, from the moment it became
publicly established that the Chevalier D’Eon was no longer a man;
because it would be impossible for him, being a woman, to take the law
into his own hands as was his wont in certain cases. Whether he were a
male or a female, the King cared little enough, but the Chevalier was
to be put into petticoats by his orders, that the scandal in which a
late French ambassador in London had figured so objectionably, should
never by any possibility be revived. Beaumarchais had stated what was
perfectly true—D’Eon’s blood boiled at the bare mention of the name of
Guerchy—while the vehement longing of the young count to avenge his
father had never been gratified, and his tongue had not ceased openly
to slander the enemy he would chastise. D’Eon had so far failed also
in disabusing the public mind generally of the imputation of his being
concerned in the gambling policies on his sex, and had not succeeded
in lifting himself above the cloud that tarnished his reputation and
saddened his days. Moreover, in charging him with having failed to render
certain papers which were found to be missing, upon the verification of
the inventories at Versailles, Beaumarchais had exercised his authority
oppressively and offensively. D’Eon would have called him to account
for this, after an unmistakably manly fashion—but he bethought himself,
as being more to his advantage, of allowing that he still held some of
the secret correspondence,[315] hoping against hope that he might yet
prevail upon the pitiless King’s agent to yield to other demands, for
which he thought he had a right to press. Nevertheless, he did inflict
upon him a _gentle_ kind of punishment in the shape of a sorrowful
despatch, consisting of no less than thirty-eight pages—the first of a
series that was maintained well into the year 1778.

[Sidenote: LETTERS TO BEAUMARCHAIS.]

                  ‘Staunton Harold, Leicestershire, January 7, 1776.

    ‘... You will allow me to tell you that the tone of despotism
    you have assumed since we signed our preliminary contract, and
    since your return from Paris, is exceedingly revolting to me,
    and causes you to be as intractable as was Mr. Pitt in 1761,
    during the negotiations for peace.... You know how sensitive I
    am, and you are losing your time and your pains in seeking to
    alter my views on a matter that solely concerns my scruples on
    personal honour. I am determined that upon no account, and not
    for any money in the world, shall it be possible for people
    to believe I am interested in the infamous policies on my
    sex.... I cannot depart from the principles of honour I have
    traced out for myself, and of which I told you before you left
    for Paris.... It is possible that the wits and financiers of
    Paris ridicule my article in the “Morning Post” of November
    13, and that they think my peculiar situation affords them the
    opportunity for robbing the English. I will never consent to
    anything of the sort, even should all France blame me.... I
    prefer being taken for a stupid and senseless creature, rather
    than for a thief and knave.... If what I say is right, I am
    justified; if not, my error must be my excuse.... I am staying
    with Lord Ferrers, who has invited me for a month past to come
    here and recruit ... but I have also several affairs to settle
    with his lordship.... I purpose taking advantage of my being
    in the country to lay open to you my heart, and address you
    with all the sensitiveness of Mademoiselle de Beaumont, and
    the frankness of the Chevalier D’Eon. I will begin by making
    some observations on the contents of your letter ...;’ and
    here the Chevalière plied with the essence of flattery the
    man she had already so successfully cajoled. ‘I can truly
    swear that in the whole course of my life I have never come
    across a more cheerful, better informed, and more agreeable
    man in society than M. de Beaumarchais. As to your generosity
    in matters of business, if by this you mean the favourable
    reports you were good enough to make of me to the young monarch
    and to his worthy minister; if you allude to the lofty,
    energetic, pleasing, striking, and creditable composition of
    our preliminary agreement of October 5, I admit with pleasure,
    although with the pain, the shame, and the tears that the
    avowal and admission of my own weakness have wrung from me,
    that you alone were capable of producing such a document ...
    but if you mean generosity in money matters, as the term you
    employ would seem to imply, I confess to you my dear, my very
    dear Beaumarchais, that with the exception of the Duke de
    Praslin and his friend the late Count de Guerchy, I have never
    found any person more tenacious of money than yourself.... You
    will no doubt say that you have had the generosity to promise
    in the King’s name, but on your own responsibility, the sum of
    2,000 crowns, equal to 250 guineas, for my female outfit, and
    you thereby give yourself credit for extraordinary generosity!
    My reply is—It is not I who have sought this metamorphosis; it
    was the late King and the Duke d’Aiguillon, it is the young
    King and the Count de Vergennes, it is you yourself in virtue
    of your powers, it is the family of Guerchy which trembles at
    all that remains to me from my baptism—the title of man, &c.
    &c. Let the diplomatic appointment from which I was unjustly
    removed before the eyes of all Europe be restored to me; let me
    follow my military career; I ask for nothing else, and shall be
    content. I shall feel in greater safety clad as a dragoon, than
    in petticoats, for I should not be subjected to that kind of
    conversation to which women are generally entertained.... This
    malady is not of my making, and my past life bears witness that
    I am more worthy of wearing a helmet than a cap, and of dying
    on the field of battle than on a feather-bed in a nunnery. It
    appears that fate is continually making sport of me, and my
    resignation to its cruel decrees, more grievous to me than
    death itself, is the most complete proof of my devotion and
    entire obedience to the orders of the King.... I hope that so
    just a King will give heed to me in so extraordinary a case....
    I cannot forgive the generous Beaumarchais, who knows that I
    have often despised my sex, fortune, and death in the pursuit
    of glory; no, I cannot forgive the generous Beaumarchais, who
    knows how I have, upon six occasions, flown from one end of
    the world to the other, travelling night and day to hasten, in
    1755 and 1756, the reunion of France and Russia, and arrange
    for the marching of one hundred thousand Muscovites against the
    common enemy; and that by secret orders from my master, unknown
    to the great Choiseul, I caused the last war to be prolonged
    by three years, and that I then toiled, day and night, towards
    the conclusion of peace.... Alas! had it not been for the
    insurmountable timidity of my late good master, Louis XV., so
    fatal to my welfare, which kept him from openly avowing me,
    whilst ever supporting me in secret ... he would have given
    me two or three times the amount, for the outfit of a female
    such as I am, with whose history he had been acquainted from
    his accession to the throne; a maiden whose conduct has been
    irreproachable at all times and in all places, in town or
    country, in the north or in the south, on the field or in the
    cabinet of princes, of ministers, and of ambassadors; a maiden
    who never tickled the ears of her King but with her pen, or
    his enemies but with her sword!... I think that this good King
    would have been a hundred times more liberal than the generous
    Beaumarchais, towards a person who has been girl, man, woman,
    soldier, diplomatist, secretary, minister, author—according
    to the exigencies of the public or secret service of his
    master.... If through pure obedience to the orders of the King,
    I condemn myself to life in a cloister with companions in
    adversity, I too clearly foresee that I am likely to repent and
    be unhappy; but it is apparently the will of Providence, and I
    am left without means of escape!’

After charging Beaumarchais with failing to carry out Article IV. of
their Covenant, inasmuch as a portion only of her debts had been paid
and not the whole, the Chevalière points out that for the purpose of
legalising the document to which they had affixed their signatures,
it was essential that the sentence of outlawry passed upon herself, in
default, for the publication of the volume entitled ‘Lettres, Mémoires,’
&c., should be rescinded, and that Beaumarchais should be relieved from
the ban of censure pronounced by the Parliament of Paris, the deprivation
of civil rights under which they were suffering rendering null and void
any and all their acts.

    ‘I have but one other request to make,’ she continued; ‘I beg
    that the son of the Count de Guerchy will explain himself
    clearly and honestly, through you, as I am about to do. I
    am aware that, accompanied by his mother and by the Duke
    de Nivernois, he called on the Counts de Maurepas and de
    Vergennes, to give those ministers to understand that he felt
    bound in honour to fight me; that those two ministers were
    good enough to tranquillise Madame de Guerchy by saying that
    they believed her son to be too just and honourable a man to
    draw his sword upon a woman, whereupon she withdrew expressing
    her thanks and greatly comforted. I now wish to give you my
    true and unchangeable opinion on this matter. I have always
    respected the birth, the qualities, and the virtues of the
    Countess de Guerchy. Her son was so young at the time of
    my differences with his father, that, far from wishing to
    hurt that dear and only son, I should save his life were it
    in danger, and in my power to do so. I will never think of
    attacking him, but I will defend myself at any moment that he
    may be the aggressor. Nothing can be more just or natural than
    that the son should take to heart the defence of his father;
    therefore, that he may feel perfectly easy—should he think
    that he is in honour bound to vindicate the wickedness and the
    crimes of the late Count de Guerchy, by resorting to arms, I
    give him my word of honour that I shall have the pleasure of
    fighting him whenever he pleases, provided he comes to England,
    the theatre of the scenes of horror acted to my prejudice, and
    the best field in Europe for such a proceeding, for you must
    perfectly well understand that to meet in France, or elsewhere
    than in my island, would be a delusion and a snare.... I
    further give him my word of honour not to lay aside my
    uniform, and will never, from lack of courage, look for
    protection in the dress of my sex.... I await, through you, a
    categorical answer, from him, upon a matter of such importance
    to myself. Through life I have been as touchy on the subject of
    military honour, as should be a maiden on her chastity....’

Referring to the intemperate language Beaumarchais had employed with
regard to the notice in the daily papers:—

    ‘Nobody has ever dared to speak to me in such terms. I hope
    it will be the last time, unless you are inclined to fight me
    before young de Guerchy makes his appearance....’ Then warming
    up amorously—‘it would be a fearful blow to my feelings to
    have to fight the one I love best, to confront him who calls
    himself my deliverer, and this deliverer would never think of
    fighting his little _dragonne_, however redoubtable she may
    be in her uniform.... I repeat to you what Rosina is made to
    say in your “Barber of Seville”—“You are made to be loved....”
    Such contrasts in an irritable disposition, which, in spite
    of me, exists in me and is precisely that of my mother and
    sister, will no doubt provide material to such a philosopher
    as yourself, for a thousand reflections on the unintelligible
    character of women. Attribute everything to our hysterics and
    weaknesses. _Quid levius fumo? Flamen. Quid flamine? Ventus.
    Quid vento? Mulier. Quid muliere? Nihil...._’

Beaumarchais reminded Mademoiselle D’Eon, in his reply to this
interminable composition so full of recriminations, of his ceaseless
efforts in her behalf to obtain advantageous concessions from the King—he
called her to a sense of her duty, and allowed her eight days to express
her regret at what she had written. He bitterly reproached her for
allowing that she had not given up the whole of the King’s papers, since
she had signed a declaration to that effect. Confiding in her good faith,
which, however, had proved bad, he had given the deed for a life-annuity
of 12,000 livres, paid 128,000 livres in liquidation of her debts, and
supplied her with the safe-conduct....

    ‘Far from placing to the King’s account the 120,000 livres I
    have so foolishly handed over, I must acknowledge my culpable
    excess of confidence, and as a matter of course reimburse his
    Majesty, unless I avail myself of your situation. This I shall
    be able to do by means of the very service I have rendered
    to you, in causing a precarious pension to be converted
    into a bond that is now absolutely your private property.
    This beneficial change having freed you from dependence on
    ministers, places you, as are all investors in this kingdom,
    in dependence on the law and its tribunals. I shall forbid the
    payment of dividends, and with your notes and Lord Ferrers’
    receipt in hand, shall enter an action against you and claim
    the repayment of 120,000 livres disbursed on your account—this,
    or the entire observance of the terms of our Covenant. You will
    thus learn, to your cost, whether my acts are of weight in
    France....’

Again a few passages from D’Eon’s lengthy rejoinders, also dated at
Staunton Harold, and we close, for a time at least, the ill-humoured
correspondence of two royal secret agents, who were simply practising
towards each other _ruse contre ruse_.

    ‘... I offer no reply to your reproaches nor to your misplaced
    invectives. I consider them to be the effects of bad humour on
    the part of the cleverest and most agreeable ape I have ever
    met in my life.... I have already had the honour to inform you,
    that so long as Art. IV. of our Covenant, which distinctly
    states that you are to supply me with larger sums for the
    liquidation of my debts, is not executed, I do not feel bound
    to observe any of the terms in the transaction. You are the
    contracting power, I am the executrix; it is therefore for
    you to act and for me to execute.... Your reproaches on the
    incomplete delivery of papers are badly founded; in the first
    place, because neither you, nor any ministers—past, present, or
    future—nor the Prince de Conti, not even the Count de Broglio,
    can be aware of all that passed in 1755 and 1756, of a secret
    nature, between the late King, the Empress Elizabeth and the
    Grand Chancellor of Russia, Count Woronzoff. M. Tercier, the
    Chevalier Douglas and I were alone engaged in this important
    secret negotiation, of which M. Rouillé, at that time Minister
    for Foreign Affairs, had not the slightest cognisance. It was
    only in 1757 that the Count de Broglio was partly admitted into
    the secret, and that he, by order of the King, associated me
    in his own secret correspondence.... I have not deceived you,
    because with twenty letters I have warned the Count de Broglio,
    the minister at Versailles and you as well, that so long as the
    sum to which I lay legitimate claim is not paid, I shall never
    make a complete surrender of my papers.... When you will have
    aged and become grey by long service in the army and diplomacy,
    you will have learnt that where a third-class power treats for
    peace with a first-class power, the third-class power always
    secures the guarantee of two second-class powers for the
    observance of the conditions.... Now, since I consider my power
    to be the weakest, and least important on earth, as compared
    to that with which I have the honour to treat, and that I am
    unable to secure the guarantee of any power, great or small,
    I entrust myself to my own prudence and experience. Consult
    all good diplomatists at Versailles or elsewhere in Europe, to
    find out whether I am in the wrong and as silly as you take
    me to be.... Should his Majesty and his ministers persist in
    the consummation of our Covenant, I will fulfil my part from a
    sense of obedience, but you are equally bound to concede to me
    my just demands....[316]

                                 ‘LE CHEVALIER ET CHEVALIÈRE D’EON.’

The astute and yet outwitted Beaumarchais had become thoroughly persuaded
that not only was the Chevalier a female, but also one of the most
unmanageable of her sex. For her own part, D’Eon was now as thoroughly
convinced that the end of Beaumarchais’ mission would be the consummation
of all her hopes, all her desires. She still needed a good sum of money
for satisfying her creditors, and yet, what prospect had she of obtaining
it from one whose harshness as taskmaster was only to be equalled by his
exceeding great parsimony as purse-bearer! However stern and unflinching,
Beaumarchais had seldom behaved otherwise than with consideration towards
the distinguished heroine with whom he had undertaken to treat, whose
past services and misfortunes had awakened in him a feeling of something
more than ordinary interest, and which, through vanity, he had not the
sense to dissemble. Keenly alive to all this, D’Eon was resolved to
profit by the favourable impression she had made, therefore, changing her
tone from bluster to gentleness, she coyly approached Beaumarchais:—

    ‘... I own that a woman sometimes finds herself in such an
    unfortunate position, that the force of circumstances obliges
    her to avail herself of services of which she is the first to
    feel the absurdity, because she knows what prompts the offer
    of them. The more clever and attentive the man who wishes to
    serve her, the greater her danger. But what thoughts do not
    these recollections awaken? They remind me that through blind
    confidence in you and in your promises, I revealed to you the
    mystery of my sex, that in token of gratitude I gave you my
    portrait, and that you promised yours as a mark of your regard.
    There never has been any other engagement between us. All you
    have alleged in addition, on the subject of our approaching
    marriage as related to me from Paris, cannot be considered
    by me otherwise than as idle jesting on your part. If you
    thought I was in earnest in offering a token of remembrance
    and gratitude, your conduct is pitiful; it is contemptible
    and faithless, such as no Parisian would forgive, however
    accustomed she might be to the ways now in fashion amongst
    husbands; how much less a maiden with so strict a sense of
    virtue as is mine, and whose spirit is haughty when her
    integrity and tender-heartedness is assailed. Why did I not
    remember that men are only fit to deceive womankind!... So far,
    I only thought of doing justice to your merits, admiring your
    talents and your generosity; I no doubt already loved you—but
    the feeling was so novel to me, and I was a long way from
    believing that love could be begotten in the midst of distress
    and pain....’

[Sidenote: RUMOURS OF MARRIAGE.]

Beaumarchais had married three wives—and lost them, and was evidently a
man who sought after feminine sympathy, a craving that became manifest to
D’Eon, who deemed it worth her while to gratify it—and she succeeded.

    ‘Everybody tells me,’ he wrote to Vergennes, ‘that this insane
    woman is in love with me. She fancies that I have slighted
    her, and women never forgive an offence of that sort. I am far
    from slighting her, but who the d——l would ever have supposed
    that for the sake of serving my King zealously I should have
    to become the gallant knight of a captain of dragoons? The
    case is so ridiculous that I find it very difficult to write
    seriously.’[317]

That marriage was contemplated became a common topic in Paris, and while
none believed, few were prepared to doubt, or treat such gossip with
contempt. We are able to quote from two letters in which the subject is
mentioned by the writers, who had known D’Eon intimately during many
years.

    ‘Two pieces of news to communicate, my dear Chevalier! The
    first is, that I have become a widow; the second, it is
    reported in Paris, and word has been written to me from London,
    that you wish Constance (her daughter) to be one also, you
    being about to marry Caron de Beaumarchais. Really, this sort
    of thing is never done....’[318]

And her landlord, Mr. Lautem, in whose house she had lived almost
unintermittingly since the autumn of 1763, says to her:—

    ‘... Every letter from Paris gives us to understand that M.
    Beaumarchais is come to London to be married to you. My reply
    is that I do not consider him sufficiently handsome (_beau_).
    M. de Morande told me this morning that M. de Beaumarchais was
    about leaving, and would not be here upon your return. I told
    him I had not heard from you....’[319]

So long as Beaumarchais abstained from advancing the ‘other large sums’
promised in Article IV. of the Covenant, so long did the Chevalière
refuse to carry out her engagement to discard her uniform for female
attire; a refusal adopted by the King’s envoy as his motive for
forbearing from taking any further interest in his refractory client.
Loménie argues that it was precisely because she could not be prevailed
upon to clothe herself in the garments of her sex, that no money was
forthcoming; but it may fairly be contended, upon D’Eon’s argument,
that Beaumarchais being the contracting power, were he to prove true
to his obligations, she, as executrix, would necessarily be obliged to
observe her engagements under pain of being deprived of the enjoyment
of her annuity. It is not easy to account for the meanness and want of
generosity displayed by Beaumarchais in his dealings with the Chevalière,
his penuriousness leading him even to neglect the bonds he had given to
Lord Ferrers, and upon the faith of which he was allowed to have the iron
safe.

[Sidenote: BEAUMARCHAIS IMPUGNED.]

Baser conduct in Beaumarchais was his participation in the interminable
and ever-increasing sex policies, the Chevalière entreating him, over and
over, to abstain from mixing himself up in affairs that sorely afflicted
her. Thoroughly persuaded that D’Eon was of the female sex, Beaumarchais
added insult to injury by offering her eight thousand louis d’or and a
share in all his profits, if she would submit herself to the verdict of a
qualified jury nominated for the purpose by the policy-holders—proposals
that were repelled with the contempt they deserved, and in the same
spirit in which similar advances were repulsed in 1771, when the
accommodation bribe amounted to fifteen thousand guineas. As bad was the
confederacy into which Beaumarchais suffered himself to be drawn, having
become associated in these foul speculations with the needy adventurer
Morande; and it being the Chevalier’s practice, with his _cacoëthes
scribendi_, to commit to paper every circumstance, every incident, small
or great, in which he chanced to be concerned, he drew up and afterwards
distributed a declaration, which was to show forth how Morande and
Beaumarchais had endeavoured, in defiance of him, to practise fraud in
their speculations on his sex.

    ‘We, the undersigned, Charles-Geneviève, &c. D’Eon de Beaumont,
    formerly captain of dragoons, &c.; François de la Chèvre, of
    Queen Street, Golden Square; Jacques Dupré, Esq., of New Bond
    Street; and Jean de Vignolles, Esq., of Warwick Street, do
    hereby declare on our word of honour, that being at dinner
    with the Chevalier D’Eon, of Brewer Street, Golden Square,
    on Thursday, April 11, of the current year, 1776, and being
    in the company of the said Chevalier D’Eon and of M. Charles
    Théveneau de Morande, Esq., of Duke Street, Oxford Road, whom
    we know to be the intimate friend and confidant of M. Caron
    de Beaumarchais, known to us as having been entrusted by the
    King of France to treat with the said Chevalier D’Eon for his
    return to France—the conversation turned on the revival, in
    November 1775, of the policies in regard to the sex of the said
    Chevalier D’Eon; that the said Chevalier D’Eon then declared to
    us that M. Caron de Beaumarchais and M. de Morande, who were
    present, had tried to induce him, the said Chevalier D’Eon, to
    associate himself with them in the traffic of these policies,
    representing to him that such a measure would infallibly lead
    to the gain of large sums of money. The said M. de Morande
    having eluded giving a categorical answer, the said Chevalier
    D’Eon sharply called upon the said M. de Morande to declare,
    frankly and clearly, whether he, Charles Théveneau de Morande,
    had not proposed to the said Chevalier D’Eon, in October 1775,
    at the time that M. Caron de Beaumarchais was in this country
    engaged in his negotiations, that he should make common cause
    with him in the policies on his sex? To which M. de Morande
    gave an affirmative and unequivocal answer. Whereupon, the
    Chevalier D’Eon having said that he had too much respect for
    himself ever to have dreamt of participating in the infamy with
    which the said Caron de Beaumarchais and the said de Morande
    sought to cover him, inquired whether, notwithstanding his
    refusal, he and his friend M. de Beaumarchais had not been
    foolish enough to deal in the said policies on his sex—to
    which we heard M. de Morande reply, that such, had in reality,
    been his intentions; but, to avoid all risks, he had consulted
    several eminent English lawyers as to whether, in the event of
    those policies being won, the law would constrain the losers
    to meet their liabilities, and that a unanimous reply in the
    negative was alone the cause of his having abandoned the idea
    of making money by the said policies; and he showed a good
    deal of ill-humour at the persistent refusal of the Chevalier
    D’Eon to countenance the disreputable transactions which he, de
    Morande, and his confederate de Beaumarchais, contemplated, on
    the female sex of the said Chevalier.[320]

                                               ‘JACQUES DUPRÉ.
                                               ‘J. DE VIGNOLLES.
                                               ‘DE LA CHÈVRE.
                                               ‘LE CHEVALIER D’EON.’

    ‘London, May 8, 1776.’




CHAPTER XVI.

    Beaumarchais’ reprehensible behaviour—D’Eon challenges
    Morande—Miss Wilkes’ curiosity—Feeling against D’Eon—Fresh
    difficulties with Beaumarchais—Speculators on D’Eon’s sex
    seized with panic—Lord Mansfield’s decision on the policies
    effected—D’Eon appears in public as a female—Leaves for
    France wearing military uniform—The King’s second order to
    reassume female attire—Marie Antoinette furnishes _Mademoiselle
    D’Eon’s_ trousseau—Visits her native town—Rejoicings at
    her appearance—Presented at Court as a lady—The Queen’s
    household—Deportment in society—Another trial before Lord
    Mansfield.


The breach was now complete. Beaumarchais had proved himself to be
perfectly indifferent in the matter of his reputation, so far as his
relations with the Chevalière were concerned, and it is certain, after
the admission made by Morande, that D’Eon would never have entered
into further negotiations, even to her own benefit, with the man who
was regardless of the injury he was causing, instead of affording his
protection by virtue of the powers with which he was invested. D’Eon sent
a copy of the declaration to de Vergennes, under cover of a letter, in
which, after recapitulating the shameless conduct of Beaumarchais towards
herself and Lord Ferrers, conduct by no means adapted to re-establish
the good name of a man who had fallen a victim to the passions of the
great, much less of a virtuous female, and his little scrupulousness in
betraying Court secrets, she informed the minister that she declined to
have further intercourse with one whose life in London, in the company of
his friend Morande, was licentious and discreditable to the last degree.
She entreated the count to be persuaded that, although a female, she had
all the qualities and the courage of the most fearless of men, and that
notwithstanding her refusal to consent to a verification of her sex, she
would be willing to do so as a favour or from necessity. This letter,
written throughout in the feminine gender, is signed, ‘Votre dévoué
Serviteur, le Chev. D’Eon.’[321]

When de Vergennes had communicated to Beaumarchais its contents, so full
of abuse directed against him, the latter replied with resignation: ‘She
is a woman, and so horribly influenced, that I forgive her with my whole
heart; she is a woman, and this explains everything.’

But Beaumarchais’ words were inconsistent with his actions. In the first
place he had betrayed his trust in confiding to Morande the nature of his
private dealings with D’Eon, together with many particulars of D’Eon’s
past intercourse with the Court of France, details which Morande made it
his business to repeat in public, the gossip thus spread only serving
to increase the agitation in the public mind on the Chevalier’s sex.
Then, Beaumarchais and Morande having become thoroughly persuaded that
all hope of amassing riches at the expense of Mademoiselle had vanished,
and Beaumarchais being about to return to France, it was arranged that
Morande should publish a pamphlet in disparagement of D’Eon, to whom a
copy was sent by the writer, with the request for an interview at which
terms for permanent reconciliation between them might be agreed upon.
The Chevalier sent his brother-in-law O’Gorman, and his friend the
Chevalier de Piennes, with a message to the effect that the only place
where Mademoiselle D’Eon could meet Morande was in Hyde Park, those
gentlemen being at the same time instructed to invite him to appoint an
early day and the hour, and make his choice of weapons. Morande’s reply
was an outrage on all decency and the foullest insult that could be
offered to a woman;[322] and when D’Eon found himself bound over to keep
the peace in 200_l._, and two sureties in 100_l._ each, he became excited
beyond all control, and committed the fatal error of writing to Morande
in language very similar to that employed in the pamphlet.

[Sidenote: BOUND OVER TO KEEP THE PEACE.]

Morande having declined to fight a woman, O’Gorman took her place; but
Morande avoided the risk of an encounter by apprising the police of the
bellicose designs of the big Irishman, who was also, in his turn, bound
over to keep the peace.

The widespread and unenvied notoriety that had rendered D’Eon’s situation
in London perfectly intolerable, was increasing in spite of himself, and
his yearning to leave the country and return to France became all the
greater as fresh dangers threatened the liberty of his person. He was the
centre of attraction, the chief object of public curiosity, and having
become more familiarly known to the multitude, was more liable to be
seized at some unguarded moment, to be maltreated and insulted by those
whose interests, heavily staked, demanded an expeditious solution of the
problem—Of which sex is the Chevalier? One pretty and innocent little
note from Miss Wilkes, daughter of the _patriot_, who had been brought up
in a French convent and knew the language perfectly, puts the question
point blank.

    ‘Miss Wilkes presents her compliments to Monsieur the Chevalier
    D’Eon, and is very anxious to know if he is really a woman as
    everybody asserts, or a man. It would be very kind of Monsieur
    the Chevalier D’Eon to communicate the truth to Miss Wilkes,
    who entreats, with all her heart, to be informed of it. It
    would be still more kind of him if he would come and dine with
    her and her papa, to-day or to-morrow, or, in fact, as soon as
    he is able to do so.’[323]

[Sidenote: THE COUNT DE VERGENNES’ EXPOSTULATIONS.]

By some the Chevalier was accused of being a spy in disguise, who should
be made to appear in the garments proper to her sex. By others she was
suspected of being a natural daughter of Louis XV.; and one night a party
of stragglers broke the windows and wrenched off several bars of the
railing in front of her house in Brewer Street, violence repeated the
second night after, the perpetrators not being discovered, even though
D’Eon offered a reward of twenty guineas for their apprehension.[324]
His aversion to the assumption of female attire was insurmountable,
but he was pledged to it and had been strengthening his mind for the
inevitable, the essential point ever present to his imagination being
the driving of every bargain to his own special advantage. He sought
to resume the negotiations of 1774-1775 for his return from exile, by
direct communication with the Count de Vergennes, and claimed that if
he were absolutely required to dress as a female, there should at least
be inserted, in the written order to that effect, the words _as had
been required of her in the reign of the late King_, after the words,
‘to resume immediately the garments of her sex never again to lay them
aside.’ In making this request it was clearly the object of D’Eon, now
about to enter upon the world’s stage, openly and permanently, in the
character of a female, to shield _herself_ against the imputation of
having of _her_ own accord, and at any time disguised _her_ sex to pass
the life of a brave and distinguished man, and he shrank from accepting
the smallest responsibility in his approaching compulsory transformation.
The minister found it impossible to accede, and Beaumarchais was
instructed to explain to the Chevalière the impracticability of her
request being entertained, which he did, by repeating, textually,
the minister’s own words, after saying that he wished the Count de
Vergennes had employed some person less odious than he must be to her, to
communicate his reply:—

    ‘... Can the King of France grant to a female a safe-conduct
    intended for an officer? Who is it that served the King? Is it
    Mademoiselle or M. D’Eon? If his Majesty in learning, but too
    late, the offences committed by her parents to the prejudice of
    good manners and against the laws, is desirous of forgetting
    the past and unwilling to impute to her the fault of having
    wilfully persevered in such a course—is it to be expected that
    the King’s leniency is to extend to laying to the charge of the
    late King the ridicule that attaches to her indecent disguise,
    by employing the words she has suggested?... Never has the
    King’s service required that a female should usurp the title
    of man, the uniform of an officer, the status of an envoy! It
    is in thus increasing the number of her rash claims, that this
    woman has succeeded in trying the King’s and my own patience
    and the good-will of her partisans. Whether she remains in
    England or goes elsewhere is, as you well know, a matter of
    perfect indifference to us. As to her eagerness to return to
    France, I gave her to understand, through you, it was the
    King’s desire that she should not do so unless in the character
    of her sex, and that she should here lead a quiet, virtuous,
    and circumspect life, such as she should never have departed
    from.’

Beaumarchais added, that for his own part he did not believe, more
than the minister, that any fresh claims she made could be of the least
advantage to her, and with many kind words expressed his readiness to
serve her as he had hitherto done, provided she did not persist in
creating further difficulties.[325]

This refusal of Louis XVI. to accede to the request made by D’Eon,
reached him at a moment that Morande had successfully defeated all his
plans to punish him. Foiled in his purpose of chastising Morande by
resort to arms, the Chevalier sued him for libel, and Lord Mansfield
directed rule to be granted; but when it was shown that D’Eon had written
equally libellous matter to Morande, the Court discharged the rule,
and the Chevalier had the mortification of seeing his enemy reap the
advantage of his own imprudence. It was whilst smarting under a sense of
these failures that D’Eon wrote to his tormentor:—

    ‘I have not replied sooner to the letter you gave yourself
    the trouble to write, because at the time you were writing
    sweet things to me, you wrote to your protégé Morande in such
    a way as to shake the phial or rather the pitcher of venom he
    carries in his breast. This was neither honourable nor fair.
    You even urged him to write libellous matter against me in
    the papers.’... Then in his old spirit of derision: ‘You,
    personally, have never been odious to me as you suppose; it was
    your conduct, your speech, your actions, your letters to Lord
    Ferrers and to myself that were odious to me. Good-night, too
    dear M. de Beaumarchais; it is two o’clock in the morning, I
    am tired and am going to bed inveighing against all those men
    who have treated me so badly, and above all, you yourself, who
    I truly esteemed and loved, and who have exasperated me beyond
    measure by your own and Morande’s behaviour....’

[Sidenote: TRIAL ON THE LEGALITY OF SEX POLICIES.]

In ever increasing anxiety to make his escape out of the difficulties and
threatening dangers by which he was surrounded, the Chevalier applied to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs to ask whether he might rely upon the
Government for protection, it being his intention to return shortly to
France.

    ‘... Had you not, Mademoiselle,’ replied the unflinching de
    Vergennes, ‘abandoned yourself to feelings of mistrust, which,
    I am persuaded, you did not maturely consider, you might have
    been enjoying for some time past, in your own country, that
    tranquillity which should now, more than ever, be the object of
    your desires. If you are seriously thinking of returning, the
    way is still open to you, and you know the conditions imposed.
    The most absolute reserve on the past; every precaution to be
    taken to avoid meeting those persons whom you regard as being
    the cause of your misfortunes; and, finally, the resumption of
    the garments of your sex. You can no longer hesitate, seeing
    the publicity given to this in England. You are doubtlessly
    aware that our laws do not tolerate such disguises. I have
    only to add that if, after a trial, you do not feel at home
    in France, there will be no objection to your proceeding
    elsewhere to suit your own pleasure. I have written the above
    in conformity with the King’s orders. Let me add that the
    safe-conduct with which you have been supplied suffices, so
    that you may now do as you please. If you decide upon pursuing
    a wise course, I will congratulate you; otherwise, I shall only
    be able to pity you for not responding to the good master who
    offers you a helping hand. Set your mind at rest, because when
    in France you will be able to communicate with me directly,
    without the intercession of any person.’[326]

D’Eon was unable to leave England unless he made some arrangement with
his creditors, still oppressed as he was by the liabilities he had
incurred in the furtherance of the late King’s service, and no sooner
had his imminent departure become extensively known, than something
like a panic seized upon all who had engaged in the speculations on
his sex. Three several actions were commenced in Easter term, against
three underwriters in the city, for the recovery of the respective sums
underwritten by them. Upwards of 120,000_l._ had been underwritten at
various times on this mysterious question, but rather than ‘risk a heat
over the Bacon course in Westminster Hall,’ several eminent merchants
forfeited sixty per cent., and even seventy per cent., to have their
names cancelled from the policies they had underwritten.

One trial on the legality of these policies took place before Lord
Mansfield, on July 1, when it was believed that the sex of the Chevalier
was established beyond the possibility of a doubt. The action was brought
by Mr. Hayes, a surgeon in Leicester Fields, against Mr. Jacques, broker
and underwriter, for the recovery of 700_l_., the said Jacques having,
about six years previously, received a premium of fifteen guineas, on the
engagement to return one hundred guineas for every guinea, whenever it
should be proved that the Chevalier was actually a female. Mr. Buller,
as counsel for Hayes, opened the cause by stating the fairness of the
transaction and the justifiable nature of the demand, the plaintiff
believing himself to be in possession of sufficient proof to establish
the sex of the Chevalier. He called for his first witness a surgeon named
Le Goux,[327] who gave evidence to the effect that he had been acquainted
with the Chevalier D’Eon from the time that the Duke de Nivernois was
ambassador in London; that about five years previously he was called in
by the Chevalier to lend professional aid, when she was labouring under a
disorder which led to the discovery of her sex, of which he, Le Goux, was
able to give satisfactory testimony. Another witness was Morande, with
whom we are so intimately acquainted, who deposed that so far back as
July 3, 1774, the Chevalier had made to him a free disclosure of her sex,
even to displaying her bosom, and exhibiting her female wardrobe, which
consisted of sacks, petticoats, and other garments for feminine use. On
the part of the defendant, Mr. Mansfield pleaded that this was one of
those gambling, indecent, and unnecessary cases that ought never to be
permitted to come into a court of justice; that besides the inutility and
indecency of the case, the plaintiff had taken advantage of his client,
being in possession of intelligence that enabled him to lay with greater
certainty, although with such great odds on his side; that the plaintiff,
at the time of laying the wager, knew that the Court of France treated
with the Chevalier as a woman to grant her a pension, and that the
French Court must have some strong circumstances to imbibe that idea; he
therefore hoped that the jury would reprobate such wagers.

[Sidenote: LORD MANSFIELD’S CHARGE TO THE JURY.]

In charging the jury, Lord Mansfield expressed his abhorrence of the
whole transaction, and of its being brought into a Court of Justice when
it might have been settled elsewhere, and wished that their verdict
could so operate that neither party might be the winner; but, as the law
did not expressly prohibit, and the wager was laid, the question before
them was, who had won? His lordship observed that the indecency of the
proceeding arose more from the unnecessary questions asked than from
the case itself. There was every external proof that the defendant was
right in his conjecture. D’Eon was dressed as a man, would have fought
duels, was captain of dragoons, and had resided here as an ambassador;
therefore, to all appearances the defendant had the best of the wager.
On the part of the plaintiff there was a considerable difficulty. Suppose
him to have been right, yet the proof of the fact was not easy. It was
not in the power of any person to compel D’Eon to disclose her sex,
and was it known, the proof still rested on the plaintiff. It had been
thrown out that he was sure of the fact at the time he laid the wager.
The contrary has appeared, for he had no proofs in his power at the time
the contract was entered into.... The Court of France considered D’Eon
as a man; there were reasons afterwards to believe the contrary....
It might have been difficult to prove the sex, if private quarrels of
the parties had not furnished collateral evidence as put the question
out of doubt. The witnesses were either perjured, or their testimonies
must be credited. As was the case in all wagers, both parties conceived
themselves certain of winning. His lordship called upon the jury to
consider all the circumstances, and if they thought that the bet was
fairly won to decide in favour of the plaintiff, for whom a verdict was
given, without any hesitation on the part of the jury—for 700_l._ and
forty shillings—a verdict awaited with intense interest, as numerous
sums on policies were depending on this suit. When, however, this policy
business came to be solemnly signed before Lord Mansfield, in the Court
of King’s Bench, the defendant pleaded a late Act of Parliament for the
non-payment of the policy he had underwritten, a statute which provided
that ‘no insurance shall be valid, where the person insuring cannot prove
an antecedent interest in the person or thing insured.’ The Chief Justice
having admitted the statute to be binding in the present instance, the
decision at once and for ever deprived all insurers in the ‘D’Eon
policies’ of the golden harvest they so long and patiently expected.[328]

[Sidenote: LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON!]

D’Eon received the intimation that he was declared by the law to be a
female with perfect equanimity. ‘What does it matter to me that the
King’s Bench has proclaimed me to be a female! I am none the better or
the worse. I am in the same condition as before the war—_in eodem statu
ante bellum_.’ He had failed in his application for a postponement of
the trial until he should return from France, and having abstained from
taking any part in the proceedings, it was bruited about that such
discretion was to be rewarded with a bonus of twenty thousand pounds!

D’Eon appeared in London in ‘her real character as a female, for
the first time on August 6, being dressed in an elegant sack, her
head-dress adorned with diamonds, and bedecked in all the other elegant
paraphernalia of her sex;’ but with the laudable desire of completely
disconnecting herself from the smallest suspicion of wishing to
countenance either of the contending parties in the gambling policies,
when the day fixed upon for her departure from London had arrived, she
drove off from her house in Brewer Street, in a neat post-chaise and
four, wearing her uniform with the cross of Saint Louis, and suitably
attended.[329] The whole of her effects remained in England, her stock of
wine, which was large and valuable, being left with her landlord to be
sold for the benefit of her creditors.

Henry Angelo tells us that the first time he saw D’Eon dressed as a woman
was in Brewer Street.

    ‘To my surprise I beheld a lusty dame dressed in black silk,
    the head-dress in rosed _toupet_ and laced cap. He had not
    the least beard—a diamond necklace, long stays, and an
    old-fashioned stomacher. My father leading me to the assumed
    lady, I received, _à la Française_, a kiss on each cheek. Ever
    afterwards, when he dined at our house, though dressed as a
    woman, when the ladies retired he remained to enjoy the glass
    and conversation. He always dressed in black silk, and when I
    last saw him, looked like a woman worn out with age and care.’

Angelo was entertained to ‘an excellent dinner’ one day after D’Eon had
donned the petticoat, there being amongst the guests Bach, Abel, and
Cramer.

The Chevalier left London on August 13, and in the ‘Morning Post and
Public Advertiser,’ &c., of the 15th, appeared her protest against the
malicious charge of being interested in the issue of the late trial.

    ‘I requested with the greatest earnestness the people of
    England, who have always shown me the greatest respect, not to
    renew any policies respecting my sex; I declared that I would
    not agree to a judicial manifestation of it; requested there
    should be no fresh policies entered into, and that the old
    ones should be annulled, and that if this was not agreed to, I
    should be obliged to quit a place which I regard as my second
    country. The _auri sacra fames_ which possesses my enemies has
    unhappily prevailed. They have not only renewed the ancient
    policies, but have obtained a judgment in the Court of King’s
    Bench, July 1, to determine my sex. In consequence, I with
    regret keep my promise. I quit with grief my dear England,
    where I thought to have found repose and liberty, to return
    to my native country.... If those interested in the policies
    would take my advice, it should be to pay nothing; because the
    judgment in the King’s Bench was made without my participation,
    and against my consent, which I opposed at the time of the
    sitting of the Court, desiring it to be delayed till my master
    should permit me again to return to England.... I would rather
    perish than rise triumphant by the weakness of that sex which
    I am accused to be of.... I here absolutely declare, and
    probably for the last time, that if any person, whether in
    France or England, can prove before any tribunal that I have
    been interested to the value of one shilling, in any policies,
    I will agree to distribute all I am possessed of to any public
    charity the said tribunal shall name.

                                               THE CHEVALIER D’EON.’

    ‘London, August 10, 1777.’

[Sidenote: AGAIN ORDERED TO RESUME FEMALE ATTIRE.]

D’Eon’s residence in England had extended over fifteen years, and it
was with no inconsiderable feelings of emotion that he again touched
his native soil. Hurrying to Versailles, he presented himself, equipped
as a dragoon, before the Count de Vergennes, who received him affably
and with distinction, but at once enjoined him to execute the terms of
his Covenant, and not appear unless in female attire. D’Eon demurred,
pleading, first one thing, then another, but the minister was obdurate,
and soon the Chevalière was favoured with the following order:—

    IN THE KING’S NAME.

    ‘Charles-Geneviève-Louise-Auguste-André-Timothée D’Eon de
    Beaumont is hereby commanded to lay aside the uniform of a
    dragoon, which he has been in the habit of wearing, and resume
    the garments of her sex, and is forbidden to appear in any part
    of the kingdom in any other garments than those suitable to
    females.

                                             ‘LOUIS.
                                             ‘GRAVIER DE VERGENNES.’

    ‘Done at Versailles, August 19, 1777.’

The Count de Vergennes had asked M. Genest, chief clerk at the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, to receive his old friend the Chevalier in his own
house, and manage him as best he could. Upon hearing of his arrival,
the Queen sent word to Genest that he was to bring the Chevalier to
her. Genest, having informed the minister of her Majesty’s commands,
received instructions to accompany the Chevalier; but the count having
previously had a few minutes’ audience of the Queen, she left the room
with him, and finding Genest in the adjoining apartment, her Majesty
told him, smiling, that she was sorry to have given him any trouble,
the few words the count had just said to her having for ever cured her
of her curiosity.[330] And yet she did not remain unmindful of him.
When D’Eon sought to put off the evil hour of his transformation by
pitiably pleading that she had no suitable clothes in which to appear,
even the Queen’s eagerness for novelty and amusement seemed to conspire
against her. Her Majesty seized upon so exceptional an opportunity ‘for
exercising the nobility of her soul and the generosity of her heart, in
causing Mademoiselle Bertin, one of her ladies-in-waiting, to complete an
outfit which would have sufficed for any four girls of the royal house of
St. Cyr.’[331]

D’Eon was delighted at the respite afforded by the time required for
preparing a trousseau in accordance with the Queen’s commands, and he
made the most of it by paying a visit to his mother, whom he had not
seen for many years. In acknowledging the receipt of the King’s order
of August 19, the Chevalier informed the minister that the few articles
of female attire he had by him were quite unsuitable for making his
appearance at Versailles. Mademoiselle Bertin had consequently undertaken
to procure the clothing necessary for his new condition of life, and
to turn him into a fairly modest and obedient woman; and to her, after
Heaven, the King, and his ministers, would belong the greatest merit in
connection with his miraculous conversion. His earnest desire to appear
irreproachable in the eyes of the King and of the Counts de Vergennes and
de Maurepas, sufficed to endue him with the strength required to overcome
himself, and adopt a sweetness of disposition in conformity with the new
existence into which he was forced.[332] This letter was signed, ‘The
Chevalier D’Eon for a little while longer.’

[Sidenote: RECEPTION AT TONNERRE.]

D’Eon likens his reception at his home to that given to the prodigal
son. In transports of joy his mother calls all her friends together to
rejoice with her over the sheep that was lost, and was found again—her
daughter—who had been her son for a time only, but now was, and should
for ever be, a daughter to her! She holds three days’ feasting, to which
all the authorities of the town and neighbourhood are invited. The mayor
and aldermen, the ecclesiastical, monastical, military, and civil bodies,
and a deputation formed of the married and maiden ladies of Tonnerre,
call upon Madame D’Eon and overwhelm her with their congratulations. Each
evening, two casks of wine are placed at the gate of the house, and bread
and meat is distributed to the people, who give vent to their enthusiasm
by firing guns and crackers, and nearly causing a conflagration in the
stable-yard and granaries. It was only after these memorable incidents at
the place of her birth, that the Chevalier’s heart felt less heavy; but
he was very shortly ordered back by the ministers, and having returned
to Versailles, he bound himself, in a written declaration, never to
transgress the orders of the King, to whom he swore, in the presence of
the Counts de Maurepas and de Vergennes, that he should die, as in duty
bound, a female.[333]

The choice of the day upon which, from Chevalier, D’Eon was to be
formally and effectively transformed into Chevalière, was made by his
relative, Christopher de Beaumont,[334] Archbishop of Paris, Madame
Louise[335] having greatly interested herself in his behalf. On the
morning of October 21, 1777, the Feast of St. Ursula, Mademoiselle D’Eon
having been deprived, by order of the King, of all her male attire, was
clothed by Mademoiselle Bertin in her new female habiliments, with the
injunction never to lay them aside, but to wear them to the end of her
days. She was anointed with fragrant perfumes, her hair was curled, and
a magnificent head-dress put on her; her gown, petticoats, and stockings
were of the richest materials, and she was adorned with bracelets, a
necklace, earrings, and rings. At the moment of her transformation,
apparelled like a bride for her bridegroom, she excelled the Queen of
Sheba herself, in all her glory. In this quality she was presented at
Court, and there compelled to remain two years, that she might become
moulded into her new condition.

    ‘I cannot express my repugnance, my grief, my pain, my troubled
    state, my vexation, and my shame, at having to appear thus
    publicly at Court in the dress and position of a female; but
    the King’s council considered such a change indispensable....
    What appeared to some as extraordinary and degrading in an old
    chevalier of Saint Louis, appeared to others as most natural,
    reasonable, and noble, and the refrain of the ladies at Court
    to the chevaliers of Saint Louis was to this effect: “Since
    your Chevalier D’Eon is a female, it is but right she should
    dress as one, and we wish it for our glory.”

    ‘My first duty on resuming female attire was to communicate
    in the chapel of the Virgin behind the choir of the cathedral
    at Paris; then at that of St. Sulpitius, where I had been
    confirmed and had taken the name of Mary, and where I had also
    communicated for the first time. I afterwards communicated in
    the chapel of St. Geneviève in Paris, in the beautiful chapel
    of the Virgin at St. Roch, and again in the church of the
    sisterhood of St. Mary at Chaillot. In being stripped of man’s
    estate and of my uniform, I am divested of every vice and of
    every danger incidental to such a condition; and being invested
    with the character of a female, am forced, in spite of myself,
    to adopt the vocations and virtues incumbent thereon.’[336]

[Sidenote: MARIE ANTOINETTE’S HOUSEHOLD.]

Household of Marie Antoinette at the time of the Chevalière’s
introduction:—

    Madame Misery                _First Lady-in-Waiting._
    Madame Campan[337]           _Second Lady-in-Waiting._
    Mdlle. Adelaïde Genest[337]  _Third Lady-in-Waiting._
    Guimard                      _Groom-in-Waiting to the late Louis XV._
    Lasone                       _Physician._

The Chevalière, we are told by those who saw her at this period, was
slow enough in adapting herself to the requirements of her sex; it would
be long, she used to say, before she became accustomed to them, and
would have continued to dress as a man had it been possible. At first
she laughed at her petticoats and cap, saying it was very hard to be
degraded from captain to a cornet! (_cornette_), and was altogether
careless in her demeanour. She was of a fair complexion, with fair
hair slightly grey, and having a handsome neck and bosom appeared to
advantage as a female; she had formerly made herself a beard, and her
chin being provided with some hairs, she employed herself in nipping
them. Wearing low, though somewhat large heels, her stature did not
exceed five feet four inches, and those who had not seen her in uniform,
could not conceive how she could have looked well in it.[338] Her accent
was peculiar, but not unbecoming as her voice was agreeable,[339] and
in making a courtesy she would bend her knees forward quickly without
otherwise moving her limbs. Being recommended to put on some rouge, she
replied that she had tried it, but it would not stick to her face; she
despised her body, she said, which she considered as the case or shell
only of her soul.

[Sidenote: DEPORTMENT IN SOCIETY.]

Being one day in a room where several gentlemen, strangers to her,
were present, a lady having remarked, ‘Chevalière, to the best of my
recollection when you were dressed as a man you had a very handsome leg!’
‘Parbleu!’ replied D’Eon with vivacity, pulling up her petticoats, ‘if
you are curious to see it, here it is!’ Upon another occasion a lady
observed to her, ‘If you wished to demand satisfaction, would you not
regret your former condition and your arms?’ ‘I have already considered
this matter,’ she replied; ‘when I quitted my hat and sword, I own it
gave me some concern, but I said to myself, what does it signify? I may
do as much, perhaps, with my slipper?’ And to another lady who gave some
advice with regard to her behaviour, she said: ‘Madam, I shall always be
_sage_, no doubt, but I can never be modest.’ Upon the whole, however,
the Chevalière seldom appeared in public, limiting herself to dining with
her old friends. If she chanced, upon such occasions, to be in the same
room with some other knight who happened to be addressed as ‘Monsieur le
Chevalier,’ she would instantly turn round thinking she was meant, and
would equally forget herself in her assiduity towards the fair sex, never
failing to assist a lady to wine, when sitting at table, or rising with
alacrity to relieve her of her empty coffee cup.[340] She was a great
eater, and usually partook of every dish, even if she sent her plate away
directly after.

Since D’Eon was not visible to the world at large in Paris, it became the
fashion to personate her at masquerades, and even at ordinary evening
parties, when Beaumarchais would also be brought into ridicule by the
pretended Chevalière relating, for the amusement of the company, the
incidents of her courtship with that individual. The tales told, however,
were not always harmless, and one report spread, was to the effect
that a portion of the money destined by the King for the Chevalière’s
use in England, and confided to Beaumarchais, had been appropriated
by the latter, who accordingly complained to de Vergennes of the base
accusation, charging D’Eon with being the author of it. He was at
once reassured by that minister, who wrote word that his Majesty’s
satisfaction at the correctness of the accounts he had rendered should
suffice to vindicate his character from any such attacks; and having
obtained permission to publish the minister’s letter, he sent a copy
to D’Eon under cover of some offensive and very angry lines. Calmer
judgments had certainly not as yet prevailed in the unsettled mind
that was ever craving after excitement; and in malicious enjoyment of
Beaumarchais’ participation in his own unenviable notoriety, D’Eon seized
the opportunity for indulging in his favourite recreation, by treating
the Minister for Foreign Affairs to one of the most tedious effusions of
which he had ever been guilty, but humorous and satirical withal.

    ‘Now that I have obeyed the King’s commands in resuming
    female attire on the feast day of St. Ursula, patroness of
    the eleven thousand virgins and martyrs in England; now that
    I am living in tranquillity and peace in the uniform of a
    vestal, and that I had completely forgotten Caron and his
    boat, judge of my surprise in receiving an epistle from the
    said Caron, enclosing copies, duly certified, of a letter he
    addressed to you and of your reply.... What has he done for
    me?... He has made me blush for my country by paying a sum
    of money in the name of the State, in bills at six, twelve,
    eighteen, and twenty-four months date, charging seven per cent.
    discount, and finally swindling an English peer out of two
    hundred and thirty-three louis.... Was it not M. Beaumarchais
    who, unable to persuade me to be dishonest in supporting him
    in his speculations on my sex, spread the report everywhere
    in Paris that he was to marry me after I should have spent
    seven months at the abbey of the Ladies of St. Anthony, when,
    as a fact, he was within an inch of being espoused to my
    cane, whilst in London?... Let me tell you that fictitious
    Demoiselles D’Eon, wearing the cross of Saint Louis, have made
    their appearance in more than one fashionable house in Paris.
    They were jesters who said the most absurd things of the real
    Chevalière, and chiefly with reference to the agreeable and
    honourable Caron de Beaumarchais, who proposed marriage to
    the Demoiselle D’Eon when on his late embassage in England;
    and whose coming embassage to Congress in America is for the
    purpose of importing snuff of a quality that will make the
    entire audience sneeze each time his plagiary, the “Barber
    of Seville,” is performed. The scene of the false Demoiselle
    D’Eon was repeated, I am informed, last week, in a house where
    Madame de F—— was hoaxed by Musson, the well-known painter,
    who personated the Demoiselle at the time that I, lonely and
    peaceful, was at work and asleep in my hermitage at Petit
    Montreuil.... Does M. de Beaumarchais, so fond of hoaxing
    others, desire to enjoy the exclusive privilege?... Let me
    tell you, sir, that all the integrity of the four ministers
    put together, adding to it that of their chief clerks, would
    fail to make an honest man of Caron, so far as I am concerned.
    People in England are convinced of this, for they have
    nicknamed him _bon marché_....

                                              ‘LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON.’

Passing over the reply sent to Beaumarchais, we find ‘The Appeal of
Mademoiselle D’Eon to her Contemporaries,’ which also went through the
press:—

    ‘Where is the woman who, having read the famous letters of M.
    Carillon[341] or Caron de Beaumarchais, of January 3 and 13,
    addressed to the minister and to me, has not said, She will
    reply!... He has sought, by base artifice, to deprive me of
    that consideration so conducive to my peaceful existence. I
    put him to confusion by ridiculing his impotent rage. He is
    a Thersites who should be whipped, for having dared to be
    insolent to his betters whom he ought to respect. I denounce
    and abandon him to all womankind of my day, as one who would
    fain have exalted himself at the expense of a woman, enriched
    himself by sacrificing a woman’s honour, and avenged his
    frustrated hopes by crushing a woman, who, of all others, has
    at heart the triumph of her sex.

    ‘N.B.—Caron has certified to and signed the copies of the two
    letters he has published; I cause copies of my two letters to
    be certified and signed by Barth. Pille, surnamed La Grenade,
    my valet, whose signature has always been respected.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘I certify that these two letters are true copies of the
    originals in my hands, this 2nd day of February, 1778.

                                       ‘PILLE, surnamed LA GRENADE.’

Amongst the later causes tried in London for the recovery of sums
forfeited by the wagers on D’Eon’s sex, was that of Jones and Dacosta,
in which a verdict was given in favour of the plaintiff; but a motion
having been made in the Court of King’s Bench for an arrest in judgment,
Lord Mansfield delivered his opinion in its favour, in which all the
other judges concurred. The decision, he said, tended to indecency, and
to make the courts of justice subservient to the purposes of gamblers and
swindlers—a conclusion that was heartily approved by all right-minded
persons throughout the country.

No sooner had the news reached D’Eon than he issued a ‘Second Letter to
Women,’ dated Paris, February 10, 1778, opening with these words:—

    ‘Victory! my contemporaries, victory! My honour, your honour,
    triumphs. The Lord Chief Justice of England has himself, in
    the presence of the twelve judges of England, rescinded and
    annulled his own decisions on the validity of the policies
    raised on my sex....’[342]




CHAPTER XVII.

    Epistle to Lord Mansfield—Voltaire on D’Eon—Anxiety to get
    quit of petticoats—Mademoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont in peaceful
    retreats—Applies for active service in the fleet—Returns to
    male attire, is arrested, and confined—Being liberated goes
    home—Arrival in London—Fences before the Prince of Wales—Mr.
    Angelo—Mademoiselle D’Eon and Phillidor at chess—Advertised
    sale of library—Treatment by a British peer the cause
    thereof—Earl Ferrers’ bond—Sale of jewellery.


There appeared at about this time in England the translation of a letter
in verse from D’Eon to Lord Mansfield, on the decision he had pronounced
in the late trial. In his preface the translator frankly states that he
has taken the liberty of deviating a little from the original, especially
where Mademoiselle, in her address to his lordship, and in the warmth of
her imagination, had seemed to have forgotten that she was in petticoats.
The title page is illustrated with a plate representing the Chevalière
in a double character, the right half of her body being in the dress of
a dragoon with drawn sword in hand, the left half appearing as a buxom
woman waving a fan.[343]

A variety of similar grotesque likenesses made their appearance, one
by Bradel, in Paris, also representing the Chevalière in both sexes.
Other portraits, however, were in glorification of the heroine, the most
remarkable being that published in _mezzo-tinto_ by S. Hooper, of Ludgate
Hill, in which she appears as Pallas.[344]

One of these prints having found its way to Voltaire, to whom D’Eon was
not entirely a stranger, the old sage wrote to his friend d’Argental:—

    ‘They have sent me a Chevalier D’Eon represented as Minerva,
    and a supposed warrant of the King conferring a pension of
    twelve thousand livres on this amazon, and commanding her
    to observe the most respectful silence, as was enjoined on
    the Jansenistes in other times. Here is a nice problem for
    history. Some Academy of Inscriptions will prove the case to be
    most authentic. D’Eon will be a Maid of Orleans who will not
    have been burnt. It will be seen how we have improved in our
    customs.’[345]

D’Eon’s affected gaiety at length gave way; she fell into a state of
melancholy, and then became quite ill, physically and morally. The
Queen’s physician, Lasone, and the King’s physician, Lieutard, were
ordered to hold a consultation, and terminated their visit by saying to
the patient: ‘Be comforted, dear lady; yours is an incurable complaint,
and will disappear as it came.’[346]

But it was not in D’Eon’s nature to repose in moody silence, and she
poured out her sorrows in pitiful appeals to the Counts de Sartines, de
Vergennes, and de Broglio, praying, for the sake of her health, which
was being seriously injured from want of exercise and the compulsory
abandonment of the active habits of a lifetime, that she should be
permitted to wear male attire, at least on Sundays and festivals; she was
ashamed and sick at heart to be in petticoats, idly enjoying a pension
instead of serving her King and country as she had been doing for so many
years; and, further, she asked to be employed in the war that was on the
eve of breaking out, France being about to become the active ally of the
Americans.

[Sidenote: SIGHING FOR ENGLAND.]

The Chevalière had been exerting herself to save France from meddling
in the War of Independence, undertaking to prove that the reasons
alleged in the manifesto of the French Court were not founded either on
philosophical or political arguments,[347] representations to which de
Vergennes, who was easily accessible to her, was disposed to give his
attention. But Beaumarchais had everything to gain by the prosecution of
the war, and secured to himself all access to the French Court, to the
exclusion of D’Eon, who found it impossible to approach either King or
ministers. Individually, de Vergennes’ treatment of D’Eon had always been
considerate, and at times indulgent, and since all her supplications to
the several ministers had been treated with callous indifference, she
imagined she might succeed in disburdening herself of the yoke imposed
upon her by getting back to London if she could but secure his interest
and influence. ’Tis said that James I. of England thought that if he
were ever to be confined in a prison, he should wish that prison to be
a library. D’Eon pleaded hard that her books and some valuable MSS.,
all ‘so dear to her purse and to her heart,’ were in London, where
she desired to live in retirement with them for her companions. Her
metamorphosis, her long illness, the war, the almost sudden death of
Lord Ferrers, and the non-payment of monies legitimately due to her, had
despoiled her of health and fortune, and she reminded the minister that
the pledges contained in his letter of July 12, 1777, confirming the
intentions of the late King in his order of April 1, 1766, left her at
liberty to go whithersoever she would.[348]

The reply, in his Majesty’s name, was a firm refusal.

[Sidenote: ADDRESS TO THE LADIES OF ST. CYR.]

If D’Eon had sinned, she was as surely suffering. There was no hope
whatever of escape from her bondage, and with her high spirit seemingly
humbled, she sought, or pretended to seek for comfort in the consolations
of religion. She retired, she says, speaking of herself, to different
convents, that she might acquire the customs, habits, occupations and
virtues which most became her, and if she had offered a bad example in
wearing the King’s uniform in time of war, she made ample reparation by
wearing, in time of peace, the Queen’s uniform amongst the ladies at
Court; then she adds, comically enough, that it was to the edification of
the Church and of her neighbours she retired frequently to the ‘Abbaye
Royale des Dames de Hautes-Bruyères,’ to the ‘Maison des Demoiselles de
St. Cyr,’ and to the ‘Monastère des Filles de Ste. Marie.’ In accepting
the invitation to visit the ladies at St. Cyr, D’Eon thus wrote to Madame
——, one of the inmates:—

    ‘I cannot in any other way acknowledge the kindness and
    courtesy of yourself, Madame, of the Lady Superior, and of the
    ladies of St. Cyr, than in giving you my word as a _chevalier_
    that I shall do myself the honour, and consider it my duty, to
    be at St. Cyr on Monday next, the 14th, at such hour as may be
    most convenient to you. I purpose going alone, so that nothing
    shall divert my attention whilst on my way to the house of the
    Lord’s elect, and that I may be the better able to benefit
    by the holiness of your conversation, which is the living
    expression of the peace that reigns in your hearts, and in the
    purity of your existence. When I compare the happiness of the
    solitude you enjoy, and in which I have ever delighted, without
    being able to experience the pleasure of it, to my terribly
    agitated existence in the several armies and European Courts
    during the last forty years, I feel how much I have been
    removed from the God of humility by the demon of glory; I feel
    that if I had done for Him the hundredth part of what I had the
    happiness to do for Louis XV. and for myself, instead of now
    wearing a red ribbon, I might some day have worn, together with
    yourselves, the crown of immortality which God has promised
    to wise virgins. Like a foolish virgin, I have been running
    after the shadow of things, whilst you, wise virgins, possess
    the substance through steadfastly abiding in the house of the
    Lord, and in the path of virtue. _Erravi a viâ justitiæ et sol
    intelligentiæ non luxit in me._ My only consolation to-day is,
    that I have had the happiness of preserving intact the flower
    of purity, the pledge so precious and frail, alas! of our
    existence and of our faith—and this in the confusion of camps,
    battles, and sieges.... The only mercy I now ask of God is, not
    to die in the hands of physicians, surgeons, and apothecaries,
    but that a cannon ball may carry me off; otherwise, to let me
    die in solitude.... I pray, Madame, that God may preserve all
    of our sex from the passion for vain glory, and the love of
    arms, which is the most serious and dangerous. I alone know
    what it has cost me to rise above myself. Alas! what restless
    nights have I not passed for the sake of a few bright and happy
    days! Truly, it is better to admire from afar the example I
    have given, than to imitate it. My happiness is nothing but
    smoke, _fumus_, and I admit that all is vanity of vanities in
    this world! Until I am able to present to you the original,
    allow me to offer you the best portrait that has been issued of
    me in England. I am represented as Pallas. Another is about to
    be published in Paris, as announced in the “Gazette de France,”
    and of which you shall have a copy....[349]

                                              ‘LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON.’

    ‘Versailles, Rue de Noailles,
    ‘Pavillon Marjon, September 12, 1778.’

D’Eon’s strength of character enabled her to shape her deportment at the
several retreats she visited with honourable and scrupulous observance
of the rules of those institutions, conduct induced from prudential
considerations, and she spent her time in the profuse waste of paper,
writing prayers of her own composition, cunningly adapted to one in her
singularly anomalous position, _e.g._:—

    ‘God of armies, it was through Thy inspiration that I followed
    the standards of the most Christian King, in the last war. It
    was Thou who gavest me the shield of faith, the breast-plate
    of chastity, the helmet of truth, the sword of justice, and
    the courage _du dragon_. I earnestly long to rejoin the army
    in this new war; give me the prudence of Judith, the wisdom
    of Deborah, the courage of Jeanne d’Arc, and the valour of
    Jeanne Hachette, so that it may be said that by the weakness
    of my arm Thou hast wrought great things. _Quia fecisti mihi
    mirabilia!_’[350]

At each of the homes where she stayed the Chevalière was supplied with
formulas of prayer in MS., copied for her own special edification, as
stated on the title-page of each pamphlet:—‘Oraisons de l’Eglise pour
tous les temps de l’année Mpt. copié pour Mademoiselle D’Eon pendant
sa retraite, en 1778, à l’Abbaye Royale des Dames de Hautes-Bruyères,
dépendante de la célèbre Abbaye de Fontevrault fondée l’an 1100, par le
bien-heureux Robert d’Arbrissel. Réflexions Morales. Sentiments de Piété.
Sentiments sur l’Oraison Mentale.’

[Sidenote: A VOLUNTEER FOR SERVICE AFLOAT.]

It is clear that the Chevalière was by no means yielding to the supposed
advantageous influences by which she was surrounded, no benefit being
conferred on her agitated mind by the religious austerity in the midst
of which so many of her days were being passed. The profound meditations
in which she indulged with others were not those of the cloister, her
thoughts being too actively engaged in evolving to herself scheme after
scheme for obtaining freedom from the restraint imposed by her hated
petticoats, chafing as she was to join the King’s forces. It is true
that the war being necessarily a naval one, it was not the soldiers of
France who were called to the strife; but D’Eon showed herself equal to
the occasion when addressing herself, this time to the Count de Maurepas,
president of the council, more pathetically and entreatingly than to any
of the other ministers:—

    ‘... I must represent to you most humbly and most firmly
    that the year of my female novitiate having expired, it is
    impossible for me to continue a profession of that sex. The
    expenses are beyond my means, and my income is too limited....
    This very sedentary life is completely ruining the elasticity
    of my body and mind.... I renew this year my entreaties that
    you will obtain the King’s permission for me to re-enter
    his service, and there being no fighting on land, that I be
    allowed to serve as a volunteer in the fleet of the Count
    d’Orvilliers.[351] I have managed to live in petticoats in time
    of peace, from a desire to obey the orders of the King and of
    his ministers, but I find it impossible to do this in time of
    war.... Assist me, Monseigneur, to escape out of the lethargic
    state into which I have been plunged ... it is _a matter of
    great moment to the glory of the house of de Guerchy that I
    should be allowed to continue my military career; at least such
    is the general opinion in the army in France, and I might say
    all over enlightened Europe; whereas my present inconsistent
    course of life gives cause for the gravest misconstructions,
    and affords material to the maliciously disposed_. I have
    always thought and acted as did Achilles. _I am not at war with
    the dead_, and I do not destroy the living _unless they are the
    first to attack me_. You have my written word of honour for
    this.... You are not aware that it is I who support my mother,
    my sister, my brother-in-law, and my three nephews in the
    King’s service; that I am still in debt in London, where I have
    left the whole of my library and my papers in chambers, for
    which I am paying 24 francs a week.... You must be aware that
    to play the part of a maid at Court is one of the most stupid
    imaginable, so long as I am still able to play that of a lion
    in the army....’[352]

D’Eon must have been fully persuaded that escape out of her state of
wretchedness was impossible, and that the pen and ink agitation, in which
she was repeating so much sad nonsense, would prove fruitless, for, in
writing, on the very next day, to her nephews who were about leaving to
take part in the war, she playfully observed that the King, or rather his
presiding minister, absolutely refused to allow her to join the forces,
through fear, no doubt, that the indomitable English who in other days
had burned, in Normandy, the Maid of Orleans, might now be guilty of
drowning, in America, the Maid of Tonnerre! Whatever the intentions of
the ministers with regard to the epicene D’Eon, her allusions to the de
Guerchy family, and her ill-concealed desire to avenge herself on the son
of her old and deceased enemy, could only have served to confirm them in
their earliest resolution that she should not, under any circumstances,
be liberated from the thraldom into which she had yielded her person.

[Sidenote: AT HOME!]

Neglected by all at Court, and perhaps despised, as she conceived
herself to be, the Chevalière resolved upon throwing off the badges of
her servitude, and again appearing as a captain of dragoons; but she
was immediately arrested and conveyed to the castle of the old Dukes of
Burgundy, at Dijon, where she remained confined during the space of two
months. Consenting to take things in a more philosophic spirit, and
return to her laces and skirts, she was permitted to reappear in Paris,
and there, on September 20, was confirmed, by order of the King and
the Count de Vergennes, the draft of a deed granting a life-annuity of
twelve thousand livres, out of the funds of the Department for Foreign
Affairs, unto ‘Charlotte-Geneviève-Louisa-Augusta-André-Timothée D’Eon de
Beaumont, formerly known as the Chevalier D’Eon;’ this being the first
occasion upon which she was officially styled by her new appellations.
After this D’Eon completely disappeared from society, having gone to live
with her aged mother at Tonnerre, where travellers, impelled by natural
curiosity, made it a point to see her if they could. In this way she
entertained at her table Prince Henry of Prussia, brother to Frederick
the Great, who had met her in Germany during the war.

D’Eon does not appear to have absented herself from Tonnerre until
about the middle of 1785, when she went to stay with the Duchess de
Montmorency-Bouteville, and at the Hôtel des Dames de France, in the
Rue de Baume, Paris. France and England being again at peace, since
September 1783, she was maturing her plans for obtaining permission
to return to London, where she was anxious to recover the money that
was owed to her, and save from dispersion the property she had left in
charge of her landlord, who, unable to obtain any advance upon the rent
due, had already, upon one occasion, publicly advertised for sale the
‘valuable library and curious manuscripts of the Chevalière D’Eon, to
refund himself for the space occupied by the said library in his house
during seven years’—a sale the Chevalière succeeded in arresting by some
arrangement with her creditor.[353] It was not, however, until the
rulers of France conceived the right moment had arrived, and they were
as good as their word, that D’Eon received official intimation of her
movements being relieved from all restriction, with freedom to leave
France if she chose, and with scarcely a day’s delay she made her exit
from Paris in a post-chaise, attended by her maid, arriving in London on
November 17, and putting up at her old chambers in Brewer Street. She was
well received by her friends of former days, amongst whom are specially
named Lord Tamworth, Colonel Kemys Tynte,[354] and Mrs. Church.

[Sidenote: CARLTON HOUSE.]

With no other resources but the modest pension of 12,000 livres, D’Eon
was hard pushed for very existence in the face of her liabilities, many
of ancient date, notwithstanding the five thousand pounds sterling paid
by Louis XVI. to extricate her out of her difficulties, for the monetary
transactions between the French Chevalière and the English peer resulted
in grievous distress to the former, as we shall presently see. Forced
by reason of this to live in strict seclusion, we almost lose sight of
her until April 9, 1787, the day appointed for an assault-at-arms in
the presence of the Prince of Wales at Carlton House, and to which,
as a fencer of distinguished reputation, she was invited. D’Eon and
Mr. Angelo, Sen., were nominated by his Royal Highness judges for the
occasion, there being present several of the most accomplished fencers
of the day, such as the mulatto, the celebrated Saint-George, and his
companions Fabien and de la Motte; also Angelo, Jun., Nogee, Reda,
Rolland, and Goddard. The novelty of a lady in petticoats engaging the
most experienced and able masters excited much mirth, even those who had
known her _en culottes_ being not a little surprised at the skill she
displayed in fencing with Saint-George. Her petticoats did not incommode
her in the least, but it was clear that the late captain of dragoons
proved herself to be more expert at the _risposte_ than a courtesy, and
at handling a foil more gracefully than she did a fan. Quoting from
another newspaper:—

    ‘The most remarkable occurrence of the fencing match at Carlton
    House was the assault between Monsieur de Saint-George and
    Mademoiselle D’Eon, the latter though encumbered, as she
    humorously declared herself, with three petticoats, that
    suited her sex much better than her spirit, not only parried
    skilfully all the thrusts of her powerful antagonist, but even
    touched him by what is termed a _coup de temps_, which all
    his dexterity could not ward off. We hear that a celebrated
    painter has undertaken to hit off the semblance and attitude
    of the hero and heroine in this very interesting scene.[355]
    Mademoiselle D’Eon had modesty enough, on her hitting Monsieur
    de Saint-George, to set it down to his complaisance; but the
    latter candidly declared that he had done all in his power
    to ward against it. A gentleman present assures us that
    nothing could equal the quickness of the repartee, especially
    considering that the modern Pallas is nearly in her sixtieth
    year, and had to cope with a young man equally skilful and
    vigorous.’

Upon another occasion of the Chevalière’s appearing before the Prince of
Wales, this time at the King’s Theatre, she was dressed in armour, with a
casque and feather, representing Minerva or the Maid of Orleans.[356]

When Mr. Angelo died near Eton, in 1801, D’Eon deplored the loss of one
of her oldest and best friends, for they had known each other fifty-five
(_sic_) years, and she was indebted to him for many acts of kindness.
The Chevalière, Wilkes, and the elder Sheridan were frequent guests at
Angelo’s table, in his house in Carlisle Street, Soho Square, where they
often sat for hours over the bottle, in lengthened arguments upon the
politics of the day. D’Eon was Angelo’s most constant guest and bosom
friend, staying at his house sometimes for weeks, and materially assisted
him in his Treatise on Fencing. It was there that old Hone and Cosway met
her. She had experienced the greatest pleasure in teaching young Angelo
how to handle a foil, until at last they became strong antagonists, the
latter, after reaching manhood, often taking much pains to put her out
of humour. Speaking of her as a _maître d’armes_, Angelo found that _he_
was violent and _bien opiniâtre_, though by no means a _ferrailleur_.
Whatever _he_ executed was correct and scientific.

Other announcements in the papers of the day show how the Chevalière
turned to equally good account her skill in chess.

    MADAME LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON.

    CHESS CLUB, PARSLOE’S HOUSE, ST. JAMES’ STREET.

    This day, at two o’clock precisely, Mr. Phillidor will play
    three games at once against three good chess-players, two
    of them without seeing the boards, and the third on looking
    over the table. He most respectfully invites the members of
    the chess-club to honour him with their presence. Ladies and
    gentlemen who are not members of this club may be provided with
    tickets at five shillings each at the above-mentioned house to
    see the match. Madame la Chevalière D’Eon will be one of Mr.
    Phillidor’s adversaries.[357]

In 1788, when the country was sorrowing at symptoms of aberration in
George III., the Chevalière issued an ‘Epître aux Anglais dans leurs
tristes circonstances présentes’ (8vo. 48 pp.), complimentary to the
Prince of Wales, which was well received and quickly reached a second
edition.

    CATALOGUE OF THE SCARCE BOOKS AND VALUABLE MANUSCRIPTS OF
    THE CHEVALIÈRE D’EON, formerly MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY from
    _France_ to _England_ at the Peace of 1763, &c. &c.

    Who is about to quit LONDON, and to return to PARIS,

    containing

    A great number of curious MANUSCRIPTS, both Ancient and Modern,
    and a very large Collection of DICTIONARIES and FRENCH BOOKS,
    and many in the GREEK, LATIN, and ENGLISH, and also in the
    ORIENTAL Languages, collected by herself, in the course of her
    Travels.

    Which will be publicly sold by AUCTION,

    BY MR. CHRISTIE,

    At his GREAT ROOM in PALL MALL, on Thursday, the 5th of May,
    and following days, 1791.[358]

    At the same time will be sold her MAHOGANY BOOK CASES, her
    PRINTS, HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE, SWORDS, TRINKETS, JEWELS, and, in
    general, all her WEARING APPAREL, constituting the WARDROBE of
    a CAPTAIN of DRAGOONS and a FRENCH LADY.

      Quale decus rerum, si Virginis AUCTIO fiat,
      Balteus, et Manicæ, et Cristæ, Crurisque sinistri
      Dimidium Tegmen!...
      ... Tu felix, Ocreas vendente Puella.—JUV.

    N.B.—Mr. CHRISTIE assures the Public that the name of the
    Chevalière D’Eon is written with her own hand, in the first
    page of every one of her Books; and that the Preface to the
    Catalogue of them contains AN INTERESTING NARRATIVE OF THE VERY
    EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF Mdlle. D’Eon. The Catalogue has been
    divided into Six different Parts, to facilitate the transport
    of it into Foreign Countries: they are now united in one
    catalogue.

    Price ONE SHILLING.

    CATALOGUES may be had at the Place of Sale; at Mr. DEBRETT’S,
    _Piccadilly_; at Mr. SEWELL’S, in _Cornhill_; and at M. DE
    BOFFE’S, _Gerard Street_.

    Printed by T. SPILSBURY & SON, No. 57, _Snow Hill, London_.
    M.DCC.XCI.

[Sidenote: A SAD TALE.]

We pass over the intermediate years until 1791, when the Chevalière burst
upon London with the sudden announcement that her precious books and
MSS. were about to be sold by public auction. The catalogue, prepared by
herself, opens with an address to the Public,[359] in which are given
the reasons which place her under the necessity of disposing, during
her lifetime, of all she possesses. She had returned to London in 1785
for no other purpose than that of paying her creditors and collecting
what was due to her, but she had been unable to succeed in this double
object of her wishes. The reigning King of France, she went on to say,
sensible of her military and political services, as well as of her
innocence and the misfortunes she had experienced, had generously caused
to be remitted to Washington, Earl Ferrers, through M. de Beaumarchais,
on October 17, 1778, the sum of 5,000_l._ sterling, to be employed by
the said Earl Ferrers, according to his promise, towards the discharge
of her debts, so that she might be in a position to leave England
honourably. Notwithstanding, however, the earl’s honour and probity,
and his friendship for the Chevalière, he discharged a part only of her
debts, and without first asking her consent, kept 3,000_l._ for his own
private use, undoubtedly with the intention of returning the money, D’Eon
having asked him to settle with her creditors, and especially with Mr.
Duval, the King’s jeweller, who had advanced several sums during the
Chevalière’s law-suits and distresses in London. Being urged to satisfy
these claims, his lordship acknowledged that he had applied 3,000_l._
towards completing the furniture of his seat,[360] the working of a
lead-mine, and of a lime-pit in his park of Staunton Harold, which
had since produced an income of 600_l._ Being dissatisfied with this
employment of her money, D’Eon wrote from London to entreat that upon
his lordship’s return to town, he would afford to herself and to her
creditors some security for the speedy reimbursement of the money. Lord
Ferrers replied in three separate letters.

[Sidenote: BREACH OF TRUST.]

                                ‘Staunton Harold, December 24, 1775.

    ‘I have so much business to settle here that if I am not
    obliged to go to London on account of the Duchess of Kingston’s
    trial,[361] I think I shall not come there before the month of
    May; and it being requisite for you to have some voucher to
    produce for the money you have in my hands, in case anything
    should happen to me, you will be pleased to let me know your
    Christian name, in order that I may send you by the stage a
    bond for the sum due to you, which bond will bear an interest
    of five per cent. And having been disappointed with respect to
    a sum of money which was to be paid to me last month for an
    estate sold for the purpose of settling my affairs, I should
    take it as a particular favour of you to leave this money in
    my hands for one year at the above-mentioned interest. It is
    all the same to me, as I receive of others the same interest
    I pay you. Should you in the interim want any money for the
    settlement of your affairs, you may draw on me whenever you
    please, which indeed seems to me to be much better than to
    remit you at present in bank notes, for reasons which I once
    told you. The gout has left me; I find myself, thank God, very
    well, and am,

                  ‘Your sincere and very affectionate,

                                                          ‘FERRERS.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘... You inform me of your coming here very soon; as you know
    that I shall always be happy to see you, there is no occasion
    for me to say anything on that subject.... Newcomb[362] is
    at present in Derby, and had some time ago the misfortune of
    breaking his arm.... This has prevented me from sending you
    the hundred guineas you want for the present, but shall remit
    you this sum in the course of next week. I have at present no
    money in the hands of my bankers in London, having withdrawn
    the same from them to have here a ready supply of cash for the
    mine, which proves already richer than I expected.... Having no
    furnace built, I cannot yet make money of it. This has rendered
    me very poor at present, that is to say, until the time when I
    shall receive my rents.... Farewell, and be assured of my being
    your sincere friend,

                                                          ‘FERRERS.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘... Since the time I had the honour of seeing you last, I have
    been very ill, the gout having attacked my lungs so seriously
    that I did not know what to think of it. I have by this time
    deposited the bond of 3,000_l._ with Mr. Woty[363] for you, in
    case I should die. It has been ready this great while, and is
    dated December 26, 1775, bearing interest of five per cent.
    for that time.... If the gout permits I shall in a month be in
    London.... Assuring you that I am,

                          ‘Your very faithful,

                                                          ‘FERRERS.’

[Sidenote: A PEER’S BOND.]

Alarmed at this intelligence, D’Eon repaired to the seat of his
lordship,[364] who, fearing he should die, had signed a bond at five per
cent. interest, payable at the expiration of five years instead of one
year, as he had promised. D’Eon was not greatly pleased at this fresh
delay, but finding there was no alternative, she accepted this bond,
dated December 26, 1775, and payable in 1780, and transferred it, jointly
with Lord Ferrers, to Mr. John Duval, on August 11, 1777, as security
for the Chevalière’s debt to him, Lord Ferrers binding himself, verbally
also, to be punctual to his engagement.

    _Earl Ferrers’ Bond._

    ‘Know all men by these presents, that I, the Right Honourable
    Washington, Earl Ferrers, am held and firmly bound to Charles
    Genovesa Louisa Augusta Andrea Timothea D’Eon de Beaumont,
    Knight of the Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis, now of
    Brewer’s Street, Golden Square, in the County of Middlesex,
    in the penal sum of Six Thousand Pounds, of good and lawful
    money of Great Britain, to be paid to the said Charles Genovesa
    Louisa Augusta Andrea Timothea D’Eon de Beaumont, or his
    certain Attorney, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns. For
    which payment to be well and faithfully made, I bind myself, my
    Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, firmly by these presents.
    Sealed with my Seal; dated this twenty-sixth day of December,
    in the sixteenth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord George
    the Third, by the Grace of God of Great Britain, France, and
    Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, and so forth; and in the
    year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five.

    ‘The condition of this obligation is such, that if the above
    bounden Washington, Earl Ferrers, his Heirs, Executors, and
    Administrators, shall and do well and truly pay or cause to
    be paid to the said Charles Genovesa Louisa Augusta Andrea
    Timothea D’Eon de Beaumont, his certain Attorney, Executors,
    Administrators, or Assigns, the full sum of Three Thousand
    Pounds, of good and lawful money of Great Britain, on or
    before the twenty-sixth day of December, which will be in
    the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and eighty,
    with interest for the same after the rate of five pounds _per
    centum_, per annum, then this obligation to be void, or else to
    remain in full force.

    [Illustration: L.S.]

                                                 ‘(Signed) FERRERS.’

    ‘Sealed and delivered (being first duly stamped) in the
    presence of

                                             ‘(Signed) W. WOTY.
                                             ‘(Signed) JOHN NEWCOMB.’

    ‘Passed by order of Mr. John Duval and Son, at London, August
    11, 1777.

                                      ‘(Signed) THE CHEVALIER D’EON.’

Relying upon his lordship’s honour and Mr. Duval’s probity, D’Eon left
London for France with her mind quite at ease. The following year Lord
Ferrers died, as did also Mr. Duval. It was impossible for D’Eon to
return to England to obtain payment of the bond and reimburse the heirs
of Mr. Duval, the King’s ministers having ordered his detention in
France, and it was not until 1785 that she was able to attend to the
affair in person. Being then again in England, she prevailed upon a
common friend to treat with Robert, Earl Ferrers, brother and heir to the
late earl, to obtain payment, but finding that his lordship only wished
to gain time and keep her out of her money, she was obliged to bring an
action against him in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, which she
gained, on February 6, 1787, the funds for conducting the prosecution
having been supplied by Lord Tamworth, in entire disapproval of his
father’s conduct. Two months later this earl, who, according to Walpole,
‘deserved his ancient honours,’ died, referring to which event a daily
paper observed:—

    ‘The death of Lord Ferrers, announced in the papers a few
    days ago, will, in all likelihood, prove an unfortunate
    event for the Chevalier D’Eon. The principal object of her
    return to England was to solicit the payment of four thousand
    pounds, deposited, by order of the present King of France, in
    the hands of the late Earl Ferrers to pay the debts of the
    Chevalière, which hath not been effected to this day. The son,
    Lord Tamworth, now Earl of Ferrers, who, to his honour be it
    said, highly blamed the legal contestation maintained on this
    subject by his late father, will, by putting an end to all
    further delay, derive great credit from this act of justice in
    favour of so extraordinary a character, whose concerns cannot
    but be warmly espoused by all who are acquainted with her,
    and the sufferings she has undergone, after having fought the
    battles of her country, and managed its interests as an able
    negotiator.’[365]

[Sidenote: AN HEIR’S FAITHLESSNESS.]

The will of the late earl contained directions that all his late
brother’s and his own debts should be paid, and although the new earl,
as Lord Tamworth, had befriended D’Eon and made handsome promises,
he no longer thought it his duty, after succeeding to the title, to
discharge the debt of honour. It should be stated that the only sums
received by the Chevalière from the day that Washington, Earl Ferrers,
had appropriated the 3,000_l._ in 1775, to the year 1791, amounted to
150_l._, paid in three instalments of 50_l._ each, between April 21 and
November 26, 1776. After her return from France, she endeavoured to
recover her money or the interest due; but all was in vain, and being
determined that her creditors should not be the sufferers, she felt
obliged to offer even her beloved library for sale, resolved ‘to carry
nothing with her out of the island but her integrity and her regret at
leaving it.’

It is impossible not to feel some sympathy for the unfortunate Chevalière
in this ignoble treatment by a succession of British peers, with all of
whom she had long been on terms of intimate friendship, even though the
moral to be deduced by the circumstances is, that the would-be biter
herself became the bitten one! Turning back a few pages to the time when
Beaumarchais was conducting the mission entrusted to him by Louis XVI.,
Lord Ferrers appears as a creditor of D’Eon for 5,000_l._, and as if to
give colour to the claim, it was represented by the supposed creditor
and debtor that the iron safe filled with important documents had been
deposited with the English nobleman in security for the debt, a story
that cannot be regarded otherwise than as a pure invention. It is clear
enough that in her anxiety to secure a sufficiently large advance out of
the funds supplied by the King, who was fully disposed to liberality, but
with which Beaumarchais was most unwilling to part, D’Eon had secured
the earl’s sanction to the entry, in her list of liabilities, of this
imaginary debt. Never for a moment doubting the genuineness of the claim
after his first suspicions had been removed, or suspecting complicity
in any kind of deception, Beaumarchais paid the money, but instead
of immediately passing on the whole to D’Eon’s creditors, as he had
promised to do, his lordship boldly retained 3,000_l._ for his own use
and benefit, in the conviction that the Chevalière would be in no hurry
to expose her own share in the double dealing, by publicly resenting the
breach of trust of which he had been guilty. The Chevalière discovered,
but too late, the blunder she had committed in trusting to her would-be
friend, and submitted tamely enough to the earl’s shameless and unfeeling
settlement, by which she was required to wait five years for her little
capital, and not one year as originally convened.

[Sidenote: DONE!]

The breach of trust became something worse as years rolled by, and none
of Washington, Earl Ferrers’ successors, after having adorned themselves
with the coronet, cared to recognise their obligation towards the needy
and ill-used knight. D’Eon had awaited the pleasure of the several
earls during fifteen years, before making the fearless exposure of
their conduct and giving public expression to her feelings thereon, in
the preface to her catalogue. When bitterly tried, a decade later, by
fresh reverses of fortune, she renewed her efforts (October 1802) to
recover what was her own, this time through Admiral Shirley, a brother
of the deceased earl, Washington. She sent to him a copy of the bond,
a calculation of the interest due on her capital of 3,000_l._ during
twenty-seven years, and a proposal for the final adjustment of the
affair. The encumbered condition of the Ferrers’ estates would have
rendered nugatory any further promises, even if any such had been held
out to the Chevalière, who reduced her demands to a minimum by asking
for 500_l._ wherewith to pay pressing calls, and a yearly allowance of
100_l._ for the remainder of her days, no great exaction, seeing that
she was then in her seventy-fifth year! Upon these conditions she was
prepared to surrender the bond to the admiral, to be disposed of as he
might think proper. It does not appear what notice was taken of this
proposition by the deceased earl’s brother, but it is very certain that
so late as January 1805, the Chevalière had not received one farthing
from the Ferrers family![366]

Scarcely had the distribution of D’Eon’s Catalogue taken place, than
sympathising friends made up a purse to meet her immediate necessities; a
subscription list was opened at Mr. Hammersley’s, the banker, Pall Mall,
where, in a very short time, the sum of 465_l._ 5_s._ was collected,
100_l._ being a contribution from the Prince of Wales. Another expression
of feeling was a public entertainment given for D’Eon’s benefit, on June
29, 1791, by the managers of Ranelagh,[367] ‘in consideration of her
having been deprived of a considerable part of her fortune by the odious
detention of a deposit.’

[Sidenote: SALE OF JEWELLERY.]

The troubles with which France was being agitated found an echo in the
heart of the unfortunate Chevalière. The news of the King’s flight, and
the abolition of all orders of chivalry by the National Assembly, she
received as sure warnings of coming distress to herself; and when the
Legislative Assembly summoned all emigrants to make their appearance in
France by a certain date, under pain of death if they disregarded the
decree, she quickly made up her mind to obey the national will and return
to her country. In the midst of her many apprehensions there seemed to be
one gleam of comfort—for she became persuaded that the hour was at hand
when she should be liberated from her state of womanhood. The sale of
some of her property took place on February 17, 1792, when were disposed
of at Mr. Christie’s, in Pall Mall, seventy-three lots of ‘valuable and
elegant jewels, a few fine prints, valuable coins, medals, plate, &c.,
the property of Mademoiselle the Chevalière D’Eon,’ which realised the
sum of 348_l._ 17_s._ 7_d._, some of the more valuable lots having been
bought in.

The latter included—

A pair of single drop brilliant earrings of _singular beauty, colour and
perfection_, 155_l._

A diamond cross and chain, _the stones of matchless beauty and
perfection_, 110_l._

A pair of single drop brilliant earrings, 109 guineas.

A tortoise-shell lined snuff-box mounted in gold with miniature, and
cypher on the reverse side (the gift of the Empress Elizabeth), 2½
guineas.

The personal ornaments sold comprised five pairs of gold drops, one pair
in brilliants; eleven pairs of earrings, one pair in brilliants and one
pair in roses; two crosses, one being in diamonds, with chain; five
necklaces; one bracelet with miniature of the Chevalière in military
uniform; two hoop brilliant rings; three watches, one being set in
brilliants.[368]




CHAPTER XVIII.

    D’Eon (_la citoyenne Geneviève_) offers her services
    to the Legislative Assembly—Is ordered to join
    General Dumouriez—Detained in England—Her English
    friends—Fences in public—Is seriously wounded—Distressing
    times—Last days—Death—Autopsy and appearance of the
    body—Administration of property—General character—Pursuits
    and habits late in life—Maxims on religion—Coldness of
    temperament—Reflections—Fugitive pieces.


Having satisfied some of her creditors with the proceeds of the sale,
D’Eon occupied herself in packing the remainder of her effects in fifteen
cases for conveyance to France. War had been declared, and the Citoyenne
Geneviève at once sent her nephew O’Gorman to Paris, with the offers
of her services in the form of a petition addressed to the Legislative
Assembly, an extract from which was read at a sitting of that body. It
stated that although she had worn the dress of a woman for fifteen years,
she had never forgotten that she was formerly a soldier; that since the
Revolution she felt her military ardour revive, and demanded, instead
of her cap and petticoats, her helmet, sabre, horse, and the rank in
the army to which her seniority, her services, and her wounds entitled
her; and she also requested permission to raise a legion of volunteers.
Unconnected with any party, she had no desire to brandish her sword in
procession in the streets of Paris, and wished for nothing but actual
service—war nobly made and courageously supported.

    ‘In my eager impatience,’ she continued, ‘I have sold
    everything but my uniform, and the sword I wore in the last
    war, which I wish again to wear in the present. Of my library
    nothing remains but the shelves,[369] and the MSS. of Marshal
    Vauban, which I have preserved as an offering to the National
    Assembly, for the glory of my country, and the instruction
    of the brave generals employed in her defence. I have been
    the sport of nature, of fortune, of war, of peace, of men and
    women, of the malice and intrigue of Courts. I have passed
    successively from the state of a girl to that of a boy, from
    the state of a man to that of a woman. I have experienced the
    strange vicissitudes of human life. Soon, I hope, with arms in
    my hand, I shall fly on the wings of liberty and victory to
    fight and die for the nation, the law, and the King.’

This petition, the reading of which was interrupted by repeated bursts
of applause, was ordered to be honourably mentioned in the minutes, and
referred to the military committee.[370]

[Sidenote: UNDER THE ORDERS OF THE REPUBLIC.]

Early in the following year the Citoyenne Geneviève, in a transport of
delight, informed her friend, M. Beauvais,[371] that in consequence
of instructions received from the Minister of War for the Republic of
France, she was about to proceed to Paris, thence to join the army of
General Dumouriez,[372] and begged leave to forward to his care six cases
for despatch to France, _viâ_ Rouen or Havre de Grace, as she might
determine after her arrival in that country. Nine other cases were at
the same time sent to Mr. Christie, who had promised to find room for
them. She was also invited by the ladies of Paris to return to them,
the invitation, dated in the month of April, having been entrusted for
personal delivery to her old friend, Captain Arden, of the Royal Navy.
The Chevalière did not return to France, having been detained in all
probability by her creditors, who would have acted with greater wisdom
and profit to themselves had they trusted to her honour, and left her
free to seek for better days under the changed fortunes of her country.
It was doubtlessly her late surrender of State papers, and the nature
of their contents,[373] that had influenced the administrators of
the Republic in her favour; but her right to a pension was no longer
recognised under the new form of Government in France, her property
had been confiscated, and she was thus left without resources of any
description, now verging on her sixty-fifth year. The Chevalière appears
to have existed at this time chiefly upon the hospitality of her friends,
there being amongst those who entertained her more frequently the names
of Lady Constable, Mr. Christie, Lord and Lady Glencairn, Lady Wallis
(sister to the Duchess of Gordon), Colonel and Mrs. Kemys-Tynte, General
Melville, General Rainsford, at whose house she met Horne Tooke and
Paine; Mr. Fitzmaurice (brother of Lord Lansdowne), Colonel Macbean, of
the Artillery; Mr. Lockhart, banker, Pall Mall; Mr. Dent, banker, Clarges
Street; Sir William Ffloyd, Count Zenobio, envoy from Venice; Colonel du
Bathe, M. Hirsinger, Chargé d’Affaires from France, &c. &c.

By the end of the year 1792 the Chevalière’s remaining means and credit
were completely exhausted, and there was no alternative but to make
public exhibition of her pre-eminent skill in fencing, a resolution
in which she appears to have been supported by Mrs. Bateman, the
noted actress and female fencer. Her first appearance, in a series of
performances, was at a _déjeuner_ given by Mrs. Bateman in her house,
Soho Square, to a party of English and French officers of both services,
several ‘literary characters, and gentlemen of first-rate stage talents,’
upon which occasion, as announced in the papers,

    ‘Sir George Kelly pushed _carte_ and _tierce_ with Mademoiselle
    D’Eon to the great entertainment of the company. An assault
    between Captain Walmsley and Mademoiselle D’Eon concluded this
    scientific display, and it was astonishing to observe with
    what vigour the captain’s repeated thrusts were repulsed.
    The assault lasted nearly fifteen minutes, during which time
    Mademoiselle D’Eon did not appear to be out of breath; she only
    once exclaimed, “_Ah! mes jambes!_” which was when the conflict
    had subsided. This celebrated character cannot be termed
    _Madame Egalité_, for in this, as in any other country, she has
    not her equal.’[374]

_January 22._—She was next invited to an _Assaut d’armes_ with Captain
Walmsley, at Mr. Towneley’s house in Devonshire Place, when one hundred
guests were present, nearly all of whom were Roman Catholics.

[Sidenote: ‘CUTTING HER BREAD WITH HER SWORD.’]

_February 11._—Fenced Captain Walmsley at the Club d’Armes, Brewer
Street, and although very much indisposed, astonished numerous spectators
with her science and activity. The captain was foiled four or five
times successively, and it was not till the female Chevalier was nearly
exhausted that he had the opportunity of a retort. Confident of success,
Mademoiselle D’Eon refused the mask, of which her opponent availed
himself.[374]

_May 30._—Fences at the Haymarket on Mrs. Bateman’s benefit night. Never,
since the death of Garrick, had the house been so full.

_June 26._—Fences at the Ranelagh, in the presence of the Prince of Wales
and Duke of Gloucester.

_August 23._—Fences with Mr. Bateman and his son.

_September._—Fences with Mrs. Bateman and an English officer, under the
patronage of the Prince of Wales, who sat in the stage box (Brighton
theatre) with Mrs. Fitzherbert and Miss Piggot.

_October 19._—Fences at her own benefit in the theatre, Margate, a
prologue being spoken by Mrs. Bateman.

_November 2._—Fences at the Assembly Rooms, Deal.

_November 11_ and _21_.—Fences at the theatre, Dover.

_November 30._—Fences at the Fountain Inn, Canterbury.

After which, Mrs. Bateman[375] and the Chevalière, who had been on a
professional tour together, returned to London.

In the Chevalière’s journals, from which the above dates are taken,[376]
there appear two entries only during the year 1794 of her having publicly
exhibited—at Ranelagh on May 26, and at the Brighton theatre on August 8.
In 1795, she fenced at the Lower Rooms (Bath?) on April 24, at Birmingham
on July 6, and at Worcester on August 13. In January 1796, she performed
in the Lower Rooms, Bath, under the patronage of the colonel and officers
of the Essex Dragoons, whose band was in attendance, Bath still being
what it had been for many years, incomparably the most fashionable and
favourite watering-place in England, and frequented by people of all
classes of society. After giving four performances, D’Eon travelled to
Oxford for April 22 and three other evenings, thence to Southampton to
keep an engagement on August 26, when an unlucky accident brought to an
end, for ever, these exhibitions of her skill.

[Sidenote: A DANGEROUS WOUND.]

In receiving a thrust from her adversary that evening, the foil broke
off, inflicting a serious wound, by which she was completely disabled. It
is well to reproduce her address to the public upon that occasion, and
the surgical certificate given to satisfy that public; the first, because
it so very clearly, and in her own words, exposes her sad necessities;
the second, because it is evident that the physician and surgeons who
examined the wound were satisfied with regard to the sex of their patient.

    ‘Mademoiselle D’Eon takes this Opportunity of returning her
    sincerest and respectful Thanks to the Benevolent Gentry of
    the Town and Neighbourhood, for having honoured her with their
    Presence at her late GRAND ASSAULT D’ARMES; and also for the
    kind Interest they were so good as to take in the dangerous
    Wound she received that Day. Alas! She is now obliged _to cut
    her Bread with her Sword_; which is indeed to her a Bread full
    of Repugnancy and Bitterness, that Necessity alone can make her
    swallow. But preferring that Shift so unfit for her sex, and
    so against her Feelings, at the Age of Sixty-nine, to a State
    of Dependence, whilst she has Strength to hold a Sword she is
    forced to make it useful, to the Support of an unhappy and
    injured Woman; bathed, as it often may be with Truth said, with
    her Tears. Her Misfortunes began with her Birth, and are only
    likely to end with her Life. The Friends Prosperity had given
    her, Adversity has deprived her of.’

       *       *       *       *       *

    ‘WE CERTIFY, _that having been present at a_ Grand Assault
    d’Armes, or Fencing-Match, _exhibited by Mademoiselle D’Eon in
    public, on Friday, August 26, at the Long Rooms, Southampton,
    we witnessed her receiving a dangerous Thrust from the Foul
    of her Antagonist, the Button having broken off, unperceived,
    about an Inch from the Extremity. On Examination, the Wound
    was found to be situated in the Arm-pit, on the Right Side,
    extending itself laterally about four Inches. The muscular
    Irritation, in Consequence of this Accident, occasioned intense
    Pain for some Days, which she sustained with the utmost
    Fortitude, Patience, and Resignation._[377]

                                              ‘J. MACKIE, M.D.
                                              ‘P. BERNARD.
                                              ‘H. CORBIN. Surgeons.’

    ‘Southampton, September 6, 1796.’

D’Eon had to keep her bed for four months, and after being removed to
London was confined, through great debility, to the house, which she
left four times only during the next four years, and then only in a
coach. She spent her long convalescence with Mrs. Mary Cole[378] at her
own invitation, an old friend from whom she never again parted, and
these two thereafter shared alike in each other’s sorrows, for of joys
they had none! ‘My life was spent in eating, drinking, and sleeping,
praying, writing, and at work with Mrs. Cole, repairing linen, gowns, and
head-dresses.’

The Chevalière was in the habit of pawning her diamonds from time
to time when hard pressed, taking care to redeem and keep them in
reserve until she could dispose of them at a fair price. In 1799, being
absolutely obliged to part with those jewels, after failing to treat
with Rundell and his friend Sharp, the well-known jewellers, she made
some satisfactory arrangement with a Mr. Moses, who called to see them.
After this, it may be said that D’Eon lived entirely upon charity.
Forced to give up the chambers she had occupied in Brewer Street during
thirty-three years, she went to stay for a time with Colonel Thornton, on
the Surrey side of the Thames, and then took up her residence permanently
with Mrs. Cole, first at 33 Westminster Bridge Road, then at 5 Mead’s
Place, opposite to the Apollo Gardens, and near the Asylum, Lambeth, and
finally at 26 New Milman Street, Foundling Hospital. Her two nephews,
Major O’Gorman, and Captain Augustus O’Gorman of the 18th regiment of
foot, called to see her occasionally, but it does not appear that they
ever afforded any relief or comfort to their aged aunt, who had been in
the habit of assisting them very materially in their younger days.

[Sidenote: PASSPORT TO FRANCE.]

D’Eon had never abandoned the idea of possibly returning to France, the
Treaty of Amiens and the First Consulate seeming to afford a glimmer of
hope. She had made some kind of declaration before M. Otto, the French
minister plenipotentiary, on the 7th Fructidor (August 24), 1802, which
resulted in her being supplied with a passport to Paris and Tonnerre,
good for three decades (thirty days), dated the 25th Brumaire (November
15) of the same year, and she received five pounds from Mr. R. Slade
‘to enable her to return to her country;’ but she remained hopelessly
involved, as appears from several touching entries in her note-book,
of which we quote two. M. Blacher, the exiled _curé_ of St. Martin le
Gérard in the diocese of Constance, called at the house of the sheriff’s
officer for Surrey, on November 15, 1804, and inquired if it was true
that Mademoiselle D’Eon was in detention. Upon learning that she had been
in custody five months, and only just set at liberty, the _curé_ asked
to see her, and being shown into the Chevalière’s chamber, said that he
had come at the instance of an English lady to know the particulars of
her arrest. On taking his leave, and pleading that he also was an exile
and poor, he quietly placed on the table a gold seven-shilling piece
which he refused to take up again, although pressed to do so by D’Eon.
Acknowledging the receipt of ten guineas from the Marchioness Townshend,
D’Eon wrote, July 18, 1805:—

    ‘This relief is a gift from Heaven which comes to me at the
    right moment, in the sorrow of my great age and of the great
    revolution that has taken place in my country, and which has,
    at one blow, swallowed up my little property in Burgundy, and
    the pensions I had received from Louis XV. and Louis XVI.’

The note was signed: _Chevalier D’Eon, who has not quitted his bed, his
room, or his house nine times during the last nine years_.

Writing to Major Clive, M.P.,[379] she complains of her reduced
circumstances, and of having lost her all by the French Revolution, she
cannot say, why?

    ‘It is a secret hidden, I will not say in the womb of
    Providence, but in the foolishness of the French, who, like
    weather-cocks, turn to every wind.’[380]

Amongst those who occasionally supplied her with funds, or whose
attentions the Chevalière more particularly appreciated, were Mrs.
Crawford, of Hertford Street, Mayfair, a daughter of Mrs. Holland; the
Misses Dodwell; Mrs. Tryon, of Glaston, Uppingham; Colonel Kemys-Tynte;
and Miss Shirley, a natural daughter of Admiral Shirley. The good Queen
Charlotte had never forgotten her, and she enjoyed an annuity of fifty
pounds from the Duke of Queensberry.

[Sidenote: DEATH.]

For the two last years of her life, D’Eon was almost bed-ridden through
infirmity, but affectionately nursed and tended by Mrs. Cole. About a
year before her death she sent for Père Elisée, formerly surgeon to
the ‘Pères de la Charité’ at Grenoble, who was enjoying a comfortable
allowance from the Duke of Queensberry as his grace’s physician, and with
whom he dined almost daily.[381] Elisée and Dr. Perigalese attended her
as her strength failed from day to day, and until she quietly expired at
10 P.M. of May 21, 1810.

When the last offices were being performed to the remains of her
deceased friend, Mrs. Cole learnt for the first time, and to her
utter astonishment, that her late most intimate companion was a man.
Upon making his appearance the following morning, Père Elisée equally
expressed his great surprise, and at once recommended the expediency
of the Chevalier’s sex being professionally determined; the body was
accordingly dissected in the presence of several medical gentlemen, the
Earl of Yarborough, Sir Sidney Smith, the Honourable Mr. Lyttleton, Mr.
Douglas, and other persons of consideration, the following certificate
being forthwith made public:—

    ‘I hereby certify that I have inspected and dissected the body
    of the Chevalier D’Eon, in the presence of Mr. Adair, Mr.
    Wilson, and Le Père Elisée, and have found the male organs in
    every respect perfectly formed.[382]

                                             ‘(Signed) ‘T. COPELAND,
                                             ‘Surgeon, Golden Square.’

    ‘May 23, 1810.’

In the Slade collection of autograph papers at the British Museum is
preserved this letter:—

    ‘My dear Sir,—Introduced by a friend of the late Chevalier
    D’Eon, I attended in the evening of yesterday at lodgings in
    two pair of stairs at No. 26 New Milman Street, Foundling
    Hospital, and being permitted to inspect the corpse, can assure
    you that the late Chevalier, called when living, Mademoiselle
    D’Eon, had the visible organs of generation of a male, and
    was a very man. Mrs. Cole, with whom he lived for many years,
    being as well as the Chevalier aged above eighty, assured me
    that it was with the utmost astonishment that she received
    the information, just after her companion’s death, that he, a
    Mademoiselle D’Eon as she called him, was discovered to be as
    I saw him—a man—that she did not recover the shock for many
    hours. The above, being interesting to you, as you can have no
    doubt of its authenticity, I have sent in writing. The Prince
    de Conti, &c. &c. had attended on the same day at the lodgings.

                           ‘Yours very truly,

                                                    ‘GEO. SILK,
                                                    ‘Notary Public.’

    ‘Doctors’ Commons, May 27, 1810.

    ‘Robert Slade, Esq.’

The body was privately interred in the churchyard of St. Pancras on the
morning of May 28, the coffin being inscribed, ‘Charles Geneviève Louis
Auguste André Timothée D’Eon de Beaumont. Né 17 Octobre, 1727, mort 21
Mai, 1810.’

Before the devastating spade and shovel of the Midland Railway Company
had commenced its work in 1868, to make a cutting through the churchyard
at St. Pancras, a slab, _in situ_, was to be seen bearing this
inscription:

                  CHARLES GENEVIEVE LOUISE AUGUSTE ANDRE
                       TIMOTHEE D’EON DE BEAUMONT,
                   DIED, MAY 21; BURIED, MAY 28, 1810,
                           AGED 83 YEARS.[383]

but, like numerous other monuments, it has disappeared,[384] ‘and the
place thereof shall know it no more.’

[Sidenote: APPEARANCE OF THE BODY.]

A cast was taken after death, of which an engraving was made, and a
tinted engraving of the _torso_, from a drawing by C. Turner, was also
published, with the surgical attestation as to sex. The body presented
unusual roundness in the formation of limbs; the appearance of a beard
was very slight, and hair of so light a colour as to be scarcely
perceptible on the arms, legs, and chest. The throat was by no means
masculine; shoulders square and good; breast remarkably full; arms,
hands, and fingers, those of a stout female; hips very small, and legs
and feet corresponding with arms.

So early as 1763, D’Eon had a tendency to being round-shouldered, a
deformity induced by much sedentary work, but that did not greatly
increase with years, or interfere with his carriage, which was good. The
low body, in red cloth, lined with coarse canvas, of one of the last
gowns he wore, exhibits dimensions showing the obesity of his condition
at death.

    Circumference at the breast                                38 inches.
          ”       at the waist                                 31   ”
    Depth of centre whalebone in front                         16½  ”
        ”       ”      ”      at the back, pierced for lacing  14   ”
    Diameter of arm-hole                                        9   ”

This garment is stiffened with seven whalebones; three being in front,
one upon each side, from arm-pit to waist, and two behind for lacing.[385]

D’Eon left a holograph will of some length, preceded by a preamble, and
appointed Sir Sidney Smith to be his executor, but the will was unsigned.
The preamble is headed, _Soli Deo Gloria et Honor_, and the testament
commencing, _Mors mihi lucrum_, ends with these four lines:—

    ‘Nu du ciel je suis descendu
    Et nu je suis sous cette pierre,
    Donc pour avoir vécu sur terre,
    Je n’ai ni gagné ni perdu.’

The preamble directs:—

    ‘When God will have received my soul, inter my body within the
    coffin upon which I sleep. There you will find the articles
    with which I wish to be buried, viz., a large woollen blanket
    in which to wrap me up according to custom in England. If I
    die in London, bury me at St. Pancras near my cousin D’Eon de
    Mouloise, who died in 1765 in London, whither he was sent by
    the late Count de Broglio to watch over my person and papers.
    If I die in Switzerland, I desire to be buried in the garden
    of the Hermitage at Friburg. If I die in Paris, I desire to be
    buried in the cemetery of the old church of St. Geneviève, my
    patroness. If I die at Tonnerre, I desire to be buried in my
    mother’s grave. Being in my coffin, place my New Testament near
    my heart, and between my hands joined together in supplication,
    my Christ, and my Imitation of Jesus Christ, whom I have so
    badly imitated.’

After bequeathing his estates (?) at Chambeaudon, Tissey, and at the
chapel Flogny, to his native town, Tonnerre, for a certain purpose
distinctly specified, he leaves to his three nephews O’Gorman the sum of
sixty thousand livres, owed to him by their father, his brother-in-law,
the Chevalier O’Gorman.

[Sidenote: ADMINISTRATION OF EFFECTS.]

On August 14, 1811, administration of the goods and chattels (value
300_l._) of the Chevalier D’Eon, bachelor, deceased, was granted to
Thomas William Plummer, Esq., the lawful attorney of Lewis Augustus
O’Gorman, residing at Cadiz, the nephew and one of the next of kin of the
deceased. The sale of his library, which included five hundred editions
of Horace (see note, p. 323), was held at Mr. Christie’s rooms on
February 19, 1813, the proceeds amounting to 313_l._ This library and his
own MSS. included all the Chevalier’s possessions. The latter, refused
in all probability by Mr. O’Gorman at Cadiz, on account of the expense
that would be entailed in their transport, appear to have been divided
amongst Père Elisée, Mr. Christie, and others who had most befriended the
destitute exile.

What further remains to be said of the Chevalier D’Eon will be briefly
and exhaustively done.

Writing to the Bishop de Langres, Seigneur de Montmorin, D’Eon sums up
very curtly a sketch of himself:—

    ‘Whatever my troubles, I never despair. I am inflexible in
    my principles, which I believe to be those of honour and of
    virtue. As a rule, I submit myself in all things to the will
    of God. Summer succeeds winter, night is followed by day,
    after a storm comes a calm! Of what use would my faith be, did
    I not live in hope? I will strive to be a man of character, and
    practise perseverance, and I shall meet with solace in good
    time.’[386]

Let us now turn to one of his contemporaries and to those personally
acquainted with him, and see what they have recorded.

    ‘This ambiguous creature,’ says Lacretelle, ‘had been by
    turns and sometimes simultaneously, a diplomatist, student,
    statesman, jurisconsult, and soldier. Few of his contemporaries
    devoted themselves so much to study and manly exercise. His
    mind was reasoning and profound, without being elegant; he
    was of a robust constitution and endured to all kinds of
    fatigue; his face was repulsively coarse. Of an unmanageable
    disposition, he was a pertinacious quarreller. There was one
    blemish in his courage—it was restless impatience that had
    constituted him almost a professed duellist.’[387] ‘As a
    soldier,’ says his intended biographer,[388] ‘his personal
    courage and thorough knowledge of the military profession
    had distinguished him on many occasions, and in the art of
    fencing his skill was eminently conspicuous. His political
    reputation was sufficiently established, not only by the public
    missions in which he was employed, but also by the confidential
    situations he maintained in the secret correspondence of Louis
    XV., whose private protection and support he continued to
    enjoy, even during the inveterate persecution he experienced
    from the ministers of the French Court. In private life D’Eon
    was much esteemed, not only as a man, but during his assumed
    character of a woman; and though his natural inclinations, and
    the restraint he must ever have felt himself under, on account
    of his concealed sex, led him very much into retirement, yet
    in those societies where he did mix, his suavity of manner
    and obliging disposition always rendered him a welcome guest,
    whilst his various attainments, and the discordant characters
    he had sustained, gave to his person, especially as a supposed
    female, a degree of interest rarely excited by any individual.
    The shades in his character were, most inflexible tenacity of
    disposition, and a great degree of pride and self-opinion;
    general distrust and suspicion of others, and violence of
    temper which could brook no opposition. To these failings may
    be traced the principal misfortunes of his life; a life of much
    labour and suffering, mixed with very little repose.’[389]

John Taylor had met the Chevalier in his advanced life at Mr. Angelo’s,
when he found that his former captivating manners must have undergone
great alteration, for, although dressed as a woman, he spoke and acted
with all the roughness of a veteran soldier. He was generally considered
to be most intelligent, full of anecdote and fertile conversation, and it
was believed that his name and extraordinary appearance would never be
forgotten.

[Sidenote: TASTES AND HABITS.]

As to the tastes and habits of our subject, he certainly through life
eschewed low society of whatsoever class. He was fond of good living, and
in his palmy days kept his cellar well stocked with expensive Burgundies
and Champagnes. He was hospitable and charitable, never forgetting more
especially his poor relations; but it does not appear that he ever had
the generosity to admit a fault to his neighbour, although frequently
confessing his imperfections to God. He was an accepted free-mason at
the Lodge of Immortality at the Crown and Anchor in the Strand, not very
zealous in his attendance. As a woman he rarely left the house except
when socially called, was a confirmed smoker, and no doubt employed
cosmetics and wore feminine garments other than stays, as we are led to
believe by the numerous cuttings of newspaper advertisements he has left
behind. (A small red cross marked every piece of linen.) He spent his
leisure indulging largely in writing, and in the study of his favourite
authors, such as Cicero, Lucretius, Sallust, Virgil, Horace, Ovid,
Juvenal, Tacitus—La Fontaine, Boileau, Racine, and Voltaire—Swift, and
Addison from whom I have found quoted the apothegm that must have been
like salve to his turbulent spirit: ‘A disturbed liberty is preferable
to quiescent slavery.’ He was fond of reading the Psalms, frequently
transcribing passages adapted to his changed condition and circumstances,
and had perhaps realised—but how much too late!—his neglect of the
admonition: ‘Put not your trust in princes’ ... when, in writing his
will, he expressed the hope that he might be able to retire to the
Hermitage at Friburg, there to forget the world, and devote himself
solely to God, ‘alone worthy of his homage.’

    ‘In religion,’ continues the intended biographer, ‘the
    Chevalier was a sincere Catholic, but divested of all bigotry;
    few were so well acquainted with the biblical writings or
    devoted more time to the study of religious subjects.’

[Sidenote: SENTIMENTS ON RELIGION.]

A few extracts from the voluminous MSS. on sacred subjects in the
Christie collection, should suffice to persuade us that D’Eon had indeed
studied the Holy Scriptures, and faithfully interpreted, generally
speaking, the doctrine of our Lord; but without entirely divesting
himself of some of the teachings of the Church of Rome, upon whose
servants he unsparingly casts obloquy similar to that heaped upon their
successors at the present day, in both hemispheres; for there is no
exaggeration whatever in asserting that it is in Great Britain alone,
where the spirit of ‘fair play’ rules every heart, that the Romish
priesthood enjoys anything like consideration at the hands of its fellow
subjects at large.

    ‘1. I trust that wise measures will be taken for diminishing
    the large number of religionists of both sexes, who are
    depopulating the State to people monasteries, and that mankind
    will at last be persuaded of the preferableness of serving
    their King and country, to becoming voluntary eunuchs,
    unserviceable to the world, and frequently useless in the cause
    of religion.

    ‘2. It is entirely repugnant to common sense, to the Word
    of God, and to custom in the primitive church, that public
    prayers should be offered up in public places, in a tongue not
    understood by those assembled for prayer.

    ‘3. Were every priest, every confessor, an angel upon earth, I
    should advise everybody to confess; but as the greater number
    are demons, and men-wolves disguised in lamb-skins, I do not
    recommend men to do so—still less women—and still less again,
    young girls. Let all read the gospels, and especially the
    epistles of St. Paul; let them retire into their innermost
    chamber, let them confess their sins to God, abase themselves
    before Him, repair their faults, and exhort themselves to lead
    a better life.

    ‘4. In Catholic countries, priests and apothecaries alike tease
    the sick.

    ‘5. I see in the Church of Rome a chronological succession of
    the apostles of Jesus Christ, but I do not see the hereditary
    succession to their virtues. If Catholic priests are the
    precious depositaries of faith, it is to be found on their lips
    rather than in their hearts, or else they conceal the treasure
    so effectually that it is impossible to discover it in their
    conduct. Thus their faith, as well as their charity, is dead
    rather than living.

    ‘6. Did religion not exist, independently of priests and monks,
    it would have been annihilated long since.

    ‘7. Although he is the head of the Church, the Pope will soon
    be obliged to remain satisfied with his spiritual power, and
    renounce all temporal power so incompatible with the maxims of
    Christ.

    ‘8. Ecclesiastics have no difficulty in reminding themselves
    that they are but men, and thus forget they are priests.

    ‘9. The study of the Holy Scriptures cannot be too strongly
    recommended, for it is the quickest and safest mode of
    becoming acquainted with the New Testament by means of the Old
    Testament, and with the Old Testament by means of the New,
    which is the fulfilment of prophecy. I have spent a portion of
    my life in reading commentaries on the Bible, chiefly those on
    the New Testament, and have found that commentators express
    themselves a hundred times less lucidly and with less force,
    than does the text itself, of the evangelists and apostles. Of
    what use, therefore, can be the piles of commentaries in the
    libraries of the Vatican, at Paris, Vienna, Madrid, London,
    Oxford, Cambridge, &c., except for burning, if they only serve
    to guide us by their obscure light, and are pernicious to the
    text.’[390]

About the year 1764 D’Eon wrote:—

    ‘Since the time when I discovered that Love, the comforter of
    the human race, the regulator of the universe ... Love, that
    ruler of hearts, that soul of our soul, to be worth no more
    than a kiss and twenty kicks ... I have never wished for wife
    or mistress.’

And later, in 1777, upon assuming the garb of a female:—

    ‘... I have never mixed myself up with those fond of dancing
    and similar amusements, and have never had anything to do with
    people of light character, who conduct themselves indiscreetly,
    and give way to their passions, following the maxims of the
    world.’[391]

The most perfect stranger to Charles XII. was Love! They had never
nudged one another! This was not the case with the Chevalier D’Eon,
who resembled Swift perhaps in more ways than one. In Mademoiselle
Constance de Courcelles and the Countess de Rochefort (the latter, by
the way, was a young widow), D’Eon had his Stella (short of wedlock) and
Vanessa. Of the scenes of their love, we know nothing. He may have had a
dozen Varinas, but I very much doubt it. Of Mademoiselle de Courcelles’
letters he preserved a large packet for twenty years, and it may be,
for longer, after their correspondence had ceased upon his assuming
female attire. The Duke de Nivernois was in the habit of teasing him by
introducing the name of the Countess, but this was the shortest-lived
flirtation of the two, because the Chevalier remained in England and
the Countess resided chiefly in France. Without actually avoiding the
society of ladies, he never sought it—_he could not speak of that he did
not feel_—and was never known, in the course of his career, to have been
engaged in any amorous adventure or affair of gallantry as it was termed,
whether at Court or in the camp, and this in an age when courtiers, like
their sovereigns, were strangely given to profligacy. The old Marquis
de l’Hôpital, an antiquated debauchee, who will be remembered as French
ambassador at St. Petersburg, frequently twitted D’Eon on his cold
temperament, but the latter preferred close application to his duty,
working early and late, with fencing for recreation, to any kind of
unsavoury indulgence. He never sought to wrong the decencies of life.

[Sidenote: DISPASSIONATE TEMPERAMENT.]

I am not aware that Swift’s unfeeling treatment of the two women he after
a fashion loved has ever been satisfactorily explained; whereas D’Eon
himself, upon various occasions, assigns to physical causes his state of
insensibility. Two examples will probably suffice:—

    ‘I am sufficiently mortified at being what nature has made
    me, and that the dispassion of my natural temperament should
    induce my friends to imagine in their innocence, and this in
    France, in Russia, and in England, that I am of the female sex.
    The malice of my enemies has confirmed all this....’ ‘If the
    Great Master of the universe has not endowed me with all the
    external vigour of manhood, He has amply made amends by gifting
    my head and heart. I am what the hands of God have made me;
    satisfied with my weakness, I would not exchange it for the
    dangerous strength of Marshal Saxe, even were it in my power to
    do so.’[392]

Most accounts agree, the one being taken from the other, that D’Eon’s
attainments included an acquaintance with ancient and modern languages.
That this was not the case is evidenced by the contents of his library
and the almost complete absence, amongst his MSS., of any note or
quotation except in French or Latin; while forty years’ residence in
England did not suffice to teach him English.

[Sidenote: REFLECTIONS.]

A few reflections, written at intervals of time, might assist us in
passing judgment on a life of so rare adventure, for t’were well, if
we would be just, to estimate each touch of character at its true
proportions, for entry whether on the credit or on the debtor side of the
moralist’s ledger.

    ‘1. So long as a kingdom is under the domination of a woman,
    all will go well. Why? Because it is then that men will govern.
    (Written at St. Petersburg.)

    ‘2. Nothing so much shows the sound judgment of a man, as to
    know how to choose between two evils.

    ‘3. Freedom may be preserved, even where there is esteem and
    regard.

    ‘4. An energetic will suffices to put into execution an object
    in view, but should anything chance to check it, force must
    absolutely be resorted to; and when I speak of force, I mean
    the force that is to be obtained from the consideration in
    which one is held, by those very persons who have occasioned
    the wrong sought to be remedied, and of which they cannot
    deprive you since it already belongs to you, notwithstanding
    any personal dislike they may entertain, and which has arisen
    solely because of the opposition to their wishes.

    ‘5. It is the destiny of popular governments to be believed in
    only when they make themselves felt; and it is often to their
    interest and honour rather to make themselves believed in than
    felt.

    ‘6. Power in a people is to be deplored, since they do not
    consider themselves answerable even for acts they commit in
    spite of us.

    ‘7. Does familiarity with great dangers accustom us to be ready
    in resources? Well, do brilliant motives, glory, exertions,
    great sights, the destiny of nations in one’s power, raise
    humanity and elevate the soul by the vigorous exercise of all
    its faculties?’

And here we have a reflection after Raphael Aben-Ezra’s own heart!

    ‘8. ’Tis said, truthfully enough, that death makes all men
    equal; but it might also be said, with even greater truth,
    that it is his origin should humiliate man; for we are nothing
    but vile insects, more agile and more fortunate than thousands
    of millions of other similar insects, who have succeeded in
    insinuating ourselves into worthless vehicles where we have
    grown, and where we have become worthy of receiving from God a
    soul, that raises us to the dignity of humanity.

    ‘9. The absent are ever in the wrong, and untruths told with
    assurance easily silence truths told with disdain.

    ‘10. He who writes is certain to have as many judges as
    readers; but among this great number of judges, how many, may
    it be said, are really competent?

    ‘11. A master-mind looks upon minor incidents as victims to be
    sacrificed to affairs of greater importance.

    ‘12. To be above the caprice of fortune, not to be moved by her
    smiles or frowns, is to be high-souled. They who too easily
    betray their joy or sorrow, according to circumstances, possess
    neither strength of character nor courage, whatever their other
    merits.

    ‘13. In France, we can construct perfectly good ships of war,
    but we cannot turn out efficient naval officers. This is the
    great misfortune in our country, which will ever give to the
    English the superiority at sea, through the excellence of
    their seamen and naval officers. In England, the son of the
    wealthiest and greatest nobleman will commence life as a sailor
    in a vessel of war under a good officer—but notwithstanding his
    influence, the king of France will never be able to do away
    with the prejudices and pride of our nobles, who aspire to
    being sea officers without knowing how to sail, even on fresh
    water.’

[Sidenote: FUGITIVE PIECES.]

From the first moment when society, not in England only, stood perplexed
at the enigma presented in the person of the Chevalière D’Eon, a variety
of fugitive pieces, some acrimonious, others laudatory, of which she
was the subject, appeared in the public prints on both sides of the
Channel. With the necessarily limited selections for which we can find
space, because we believe they form a fit sequel to the history of our
archetype, we gratefully take leave of the reader, who will have had the
kindness to accompany us thus far.


_Verses believed to have been written by an eminent Doctor of Divinity of
the University of Oxford, and addressed to a friend of the Chevalier._

    Exul ades, nimium felix! tu victima veri,
      Causa boni, patriæ facta, D’Eone, tua est.
    Curia quondam habuit magnum Romana Catonem:
      Majorem sed habet jam Gallicana suum.

                                               _Political Register_, 1768.


_A Mademoiselle —— qui s’était déguisée en homme._

    Bonjour, fripon de Chevalier,
    Qui savez si bien l’art de plaire,
    Que, par un bonheur singulier,
    De nos beautés la plus sévère
    En faveur d’un tel écolier,
    Déposant son ton minaudier
    Et sa sagesse grimacière,
    Pourrait peut-être s’oublier,
    Ou plutôt moins se contrefaire.
    Mon cher, nous le savons trop bien:
    (Le ciel en tout est bon et sage)
    Pour un si hardi personnage,
    Dans le fond vous ne valez rien.
    Croyez-moi: reprenez un rôle
    Que vous jouez plus sûrement:
    D’un imposteur déguisement
    Que votre sexe se console;
    Du mien vous faites le tourment;
    Et le vôtre, sur ma parole,
    Vous doit son plus bel ornement.
    Hélas! malheureux que nous sommes!
    Vous avez tout pour nous charmer:
    C’est bien être au-dessus des hommes
    Que de savoir s’en faire aimer!

                                                M. D’ARNAUD.
                                               _Almanach des Muses_, 1771.


_Lines on hearing a greyheaded lady called Miss._

    In humdrum, ancient days, the pretty name
    Of Miss at twenty was exchang’d for _Dame_,
    But these wise times to compliment exhort ye,
    For modern Misses are full _five-and-forty_.

                                                 ELEVEN’S A NICK.
                                                _The Westminster Gazette_,
                                                 October 8-12, 1776.


_Quatrain pour le buste de Mademoiselle D’Eon, exécuté par Madame
Falconet._

    Ce marbre, où de D’Eon le buste est retracé,
    A deux femmes assure une gloire immortelle;
    Et par elles vaincu, l’autre sexe est forcé
    D’envier à la fois l’artiste et le modèle.

                                                M. BLIN LE SAINMORE.
                                               _Almanach des Muses_, 1781.


_Impromptu sur Mademoiselle D’Eon, qui lui a été remis à Londres par M.
Angelo, père, maître d’armes de la famille Royale d’Angleterre._

    D’EON, ce double habit, qui frappe nos regards,
    Semble nous annoncer ton double caractère.
    Oui, tu sus dans la paix, au milieu des hazards,
    Cultiver d’une main politique et guerrière
    L’olive de Minerve, et les lauriers de Mars.

                                                                  Ch. MSS.


_On Mademoiselle D’Eon’s skill in fencing._

    A prodigy! this Chevalier,
    A most unrivalled peerless Peer
      Is surely Monsieur D’Eon;
    In arts of peace and war renown’d,
    As well as politics profound,
      And brave as Cœur-de-Lion.

    In vain may time his page explore,
    To find a precedent of yore,
      As yet out-done by no man;
    Let Britain boast her warlike sons,
    Or Asia of her amazons,
      While France can boast a woman.

    Both sexes’ admiration thou,
    A female and a manly brow,
      At once so oddly met;
    Say, can ye sages yet decide
    Which, best or both, can D’Eon guide,
      The camp or cabinet.

                                                         _Old Newspapers._




ARGUMENT.

    ‘Toute histoire qui n’est pas contemporaine est suspecte.’—PASCAL.


Two events in the career of the Chevalier D’Eon, undisputed by his
contemporaries, but controverted of late years, must ever give cause for
despair to biographers, so long as they seek to determine, by written
evidence alone—(1) That D’Eon went to St. Petersburg for the first
time in 1755, appearing there in the disguise of a female. (2) That he
declared himself to be a female, and permanently adopted female attire in
the year 1777, solely in obedience to the commands of Louis XVI. and his
ministers.

The objections raised by the non-contents to these earliest traditions is
based uniquely on the complete absence of any documents in their direct
support; how far such documents are indispensable the reader will judge
in the face of much incidental evidence in their favour.

Boutaric (i. 81), writing in 1866, says: ‘About the year 1755 (_vers_
1755) was conducted a negotiation (during the interrupted diplomatic
relations between France and Russia), from which the Count de Broglie
was excluded, but wherein took part a personage whose name has become
celebrated, the Chevalier D’Eon.’ It was with no greater precision, that
the Archivist of the Empire was enabled to fix the date of the Chevalier
Douglas’ departure for Russia (no great matter for surprise) seeing that
_neither amongst the national archives, nor at the ministry for foreign
affairs, are to be found any papers whatever relating to Douglas’ first
journey to Russia!_[393] A deficiency, however, that has been supplied
by Vandal (p. 263), and at p. 12 of this book upon the authority of the
British ambassador at St. Petersburg, the arrival at the Russian capital
of the King of France’s secret agent having unquestionably taken place in
October, 1755. That D’Eon went with Douglas appears from several of the
Chevalier’s indirect statements to that effect, and by some fortuitous
but very forcible testimony.


D’EON.

    To the Duke de Praslin, August 28, and September 13, 1763.
    Appeals earnestly for pecuniary assistance to enable him to pay
    off a loan he had contracted _nine years previously_, to enable
    him to proceed to Russia on duty for the King, upon his first
    journey with the Chevalier Douglas, which was the origin of all
    the negotiations of the Court of Versailles with that of St.
    Petersburg. (See also ‘Covenant,’ p. 246.)

    In the _Note_ to the Count de Guerchy, 1763, D’Eon styles
    himself as having been ‘_sent to Russia with the Chevalier
    Douglas for the reunion of the two Courts_,’ and being
    afterwards secretary of Embassy at the Court of Elizabeth.

    In the ‘Discours Préliminaire’ to the ‘Lettres, Mémoires,’
    &c., published in 1764. ‘_Towards the end of the year 1755, my
    destiny dragged me into diplomacy_, although I was inclined
    rather for a soldier’s life.’

    To Beaumarchais, January 7, 1776. (See pp. 267 and 271.) ‘You
    know how I have upon six occasions flown from one end of the
    world to the other, travelling night and day, _to hasten in
    1755 and 1756 the reunion of France and Russia_.’

    Note written in 1776. ‘I know how to conduct myself abroad ...
    with the prudence and policy acquired by long experience and _a
    residence of twenty-two years in foreign lands_,’ see p. 243.

    To the Count de Vergennes, May 28, 1776. ‘... None but those
    concerned were informed of this political intrigue, _commenced
    in 1755 by the Prince de Conti and Tercier, and executed by the
    Chevalier Douglas and myself only_.’


OTHER AUTHORITIES.

    La Messalière, p. 74. ‘_Douglas awaited at Anhalt the arrival
    of D’Eon from Paris_, and on reaching St. Petersburg they
    pretended to be merchants of low degree,’ &c.

    Flassan, vi. 110. ‘Woronzoff and _D’Eon were the intermediaries
    in the correspondence between Louis XV. and Elizabeth_.’

    The Marquis de l’Hôpital to the Duke de Choiseul, August 23,
    1760. ‘The services of M. D’Eon in foreign affairs are well
    known. _He has not a little contributed to the renewing of the
    alliance with Russia._’

    The Chevalier Douglas to M. Rouillé, St. Petersburg, 1756, ‘I
    am very greatly pleased at the arrival of M. D’Eon. _I have
    been long acquainted with his intelligence, his zeal, and
    attachment to his work._’

    ‘Gazette d’Utrecht,’ No. xlii., 1757. ‘_M. D’Eon de Beaumont
    who has been at work under the Chevalier Douglas, Minister
    Plenipotentiary for France, during the whole time of his
    negotiations with this Court, &c._ The Empress’ gift of 500
    ducats is the result of the esteem and good-will he has gained
    for himself at this Court during his stay.’ _St. Petersburg
    Correspondence._

    The Duke de Nivernois to M. de Bertin, Controller-General of
    Finance, October 12, 1762. ‘_M. D’Eon has already been employed
    upon several occasions at the Court of Russia, under critical
    and most important circumstances._’

    Royal warrant of August 25, 1775, granting permission to
    Mademoiselle D’Eon to wear the cross of St. Louis in female
    attire. ‘His Majesty desiring to mark by special favour
    his sense of the public and secret services, in war and in
    diplomacy, _which the said Mademoiselle D’Eon de Beaumont has
    had the good fortune to render during upwards of twenty years,
    consecutively, to the late King,’ &c._, see p. 254.

I would add under this head, for what it is worth, that the anecdotes
related by D’Eon concerning himself in Russia have been taken from a
note-book, ‘Recueil de mes Pensées,’ dated 1754.

The non-contents maintain, that until he became secretary of Embassy,
nothing was known of D’Eon. I ask in reply: How came a young, untried,
and unknown individual to be appointed secretary to the French Embassy in
Russia, during a crisis in the affairs of the two countries?

A first incitement to the persuasion that D’Eon’s earliest introduction
at St. Petersburg was in the character of a female, exists in the
portrait by La Tour. When D’Eon was in his twenty-fifth (or more probably
twenty-seventh[394]) year, La Tour was a greatly esteemed and general
favourite; he had painted a full length picture of Louis XV., and
portraits of Madame de Pompadour and many others at Court, and as it
is scarcely credible, from what we know of his circumstances in those
days, that D’Eon was in a position to employ an artist of established
reputation to paint a fancy portrait of himself for himself, and this
apart from his known innate dislike to any such travesty, we perhaps see
personified in the comely young woman at page 14, a representation of _le
petit D’Eon_, as he was expected, by the Prince de Conti, shortly to make
his appearance at the Russian capital.

In recapitulating his services to the Duke de Praslin (June 5, 1763)
D’Eon showed that when sent to Petersburg by M. Rouillé, in 1756, for
secret and important motives, reasons of policy required that certain
views entertained with regard to himself, and for which he felt some
repugnance, should be abandoned; whereupon he received the minister’s
orders to remain with Douglas until the arrival of the new ambassador.
What but a repetition of the part he played in 1755 is to be understood
from his repugnance to perform duties assigned to him! It was quite
beyond D’Eon’s power to endure from others any allusion to his effeminate
appearance or physical defects, and he studiously eschewed all reference
to his assumption of female attire, by rarely specifying his first visit
to St. Petersburg as having been in 1755, preferring to allude in general
terms to his ‘earliest journeys to Russia.’ Instances there are, as we
have shown, to the contrary, but this was at a time when there no longer
existed any object in concealing the past so very carefully, and when
admission to that effect was only too likely, as he thought, to turn to
his advantage. See p. 247 note, and p. 267.

It was not his fault, he told the Count de Broglio, if the Princess
Dashkoff assured people in England that he was a female; and it is true
that _after the arrival of that lady in London, fresh reports were
circulated tending to confirm the suspicions already entertained that the
Chevalier was indeed a woman_.

There is preserved in the public library at Tonnerre a note from the old
Marquis de l’Hôpital to D’Eon, written in a spirit of pleasantry, and
although undated, is obviously of the last half of 1759, or of the first
half of 1760.

                                                              ‘Noon.

    ‘However great my pleasure would be at seeing you, I have
    no wish, _ma chère Lia_, to have to reproach myself with
    committing another folly. Therefore remain shut up until your
    eyes are quite well again.... I shall perhaps call to see you,
    some day after to-morrow, so soon as my lame courier will have
    left. This will depend upon what the Chancellor is going to do,
    and on my fancy. Adieu, _ma belle de Beaumont_. I embrace you.

                                                         L’HÔPITAL.’

    ‘A Monsieur D’Eon, St. Petersburg.’

Could Lia have been the name adopted by D’Eon during his disguise
in 1755, or are we to believe that it was playfully applied by the
ambassador to the secretary suffering from ophthalmia, because ‘Leah was
tender-eyed?’

The secret autograph order of Louis XV., dated October 4, 1763 (p.
104), is sufficiently significative, and can only have reference to
the Chevalier’s earliest connection with Russia, because from August,
1756, he was officially recognised as secretary of Embassy, until his
final departure for France in August, 1760, after which he fell ill of
small-pox. Early in 1761 he joined the army in the field, served as
aide-de-camp to the de Broglios throughout the campaign of that year, and
upon his return to France went on leave, whilst awaiting the appointment
of minister plenipotentiary to Russia, which, he wrote to tell his
colonel, the Marquis d’Autichamp, would take him to St. Petersburg for
the fourth time. See ‘Lettres, Mémoires,’ &c.

Madame Campan had frequently heard the Chevalier repeat to her father,
M. Genest, the contents of Louis XV.’s order, in which that monarch
separated his individuality from the person of the King of France. She
had special opportunities afterwards, as lady-in-waiting to the queen,
for becoming acquainted with D’Eon’s character during his two years’
residence at the Court of Marie Antoinette and in its precincts, and she
long survived him, dying in 1822; we may therefore legitimately assume
that had his veracity been generally mistrusted, or had she doubted
the existence of such an order, she would assuredly have qualified his
statement, unless she had cause to be satisfied that the order, which it
is pretty certain she never saw, was indeed in the King’s own hand.

Dutens’ version is to this effect. The King had a secret minister at the
several Courts, who carried out his views without the knowledge of his
ambassador. This was the position at the Court of Russia of the Chevalier
D’Eon, sent thither upon the recommendations of the Prince de Conti, who
was not even aware of his sex. He spent several months at St. Petersburg,
and was clever enough to secure presentation to the Empress Elizabeth in
the character of a female, and conclude in fifteen days an affair upon
which the ambassador had been for a long time engaged.

The earliest intimation of D’Eon’s somewhat familiar intercourse with
Elizabeth appears in the work of de la Fortelle, of whom the Chevalier
says:—‘Il m’a élevé un monument de gloire dans son grand ouvrage.’
According to this author, D’Eon was received at the Russian Court in a
secret capacity, and having succeeded in making himself agreeable in
the sight of the Empress, and secured the good-will of her favourite
minister, his consummate tact enabled him to approach the sovereign,
to converse with and gradually interest her, and having secured her
Majesty’s confidence, he prepared her mind to receive impressions
favourable to the cause he had at heart.

Did D’Eon permanently adopt female attire in 1777, solely in obedience to
the commands of Louis XVI. and his ministers?

In Kirby’s ‘Wonderful and Eccentric Museum’ is quoted from the ‘Gazette
de Santé,’ a periodical of the day, an article that appeared soon after
the Chevalier’s decease, and which we feel bound to give at length.

    It is singular enough that while all Europe was making a
    woman of this dubious character, there existed in Paris many
    unimpeachable witnesses who would have vouched for his manhood
    long before it was put in question. We have had the following
    details from the Baron de Cleybrocke, who has authorised us to
    publish them:—

    ‘The Chevalier D’Eon received his first education at M.
    Tarnier’s, the schoolmaster, Rue de Nevers, Paris; there was
    in that school an usher, M. Vicaire, since rector of the
    University, and previously tutor to young Cleybrocke, to whom
    he had often affirmed, when the question was started in London
    on the sex of the Chevalier, that he had many a time conducted
    D’Eon to bathe with his other scholars, and was positive that
    he was a man. What reason then could have induced Government
    to condemn a soldier who had obtained military orders, and
    a respectable diplomatic character, to assume the dress of
    a woman, when his boldness, his propensities, his constant
    habits, his love intrigues, and even his beard and his figure,
    gave the lie to his dress! Some politicians think that they
    have found the reason of this strange conduct on the part of
    the Government in the means that intriguing character had made
    use of to succeed in his secret diplomacy, and which were
    such, they say, that the discovery of his real sex might have
    lowered the dignity of the French Government, and disturbed
    the peace, as well as sullied the honour of many families, in
    which D’Eon had been received with that unbounded confidence
    which women grant to a woman only. They strengthen their
    opinion by the report current in Paris, when the Chevalier was
    ordered to assume female attire, that he had the alternative
    of obeying, or ending his days in the Bastille, in consequence
    of the irregularities he had committed under cover of the sex
    to which he had pretended to belong, to ensure the success
    of his secret diplomatic negotiations. This conjecture is
    still further confirmed by the testimony of two of his former
    schoolfellows, who, on hearing a report which they were
    positive was unfounded, were impelled by curiosity to visit
    D’Eon. They found him in bed. “What will you have me do?” said
    he, when they had explained the object of their visit; “they
    have ordered me to be a woman, and I wear petticoats by command
    of the King.”’

From this kind of declaration D’Eon never swerved, always maintaining
that he was forced to pass for a woman, and it will be remembered
that when resisting the pressure put upon him by Beaumarchais, he
reminded that unyielding negotiator that it was Louis XV. and the Duke
d’Aiguillon, Louis XVI. and the Count de Vergennes, and the de Guerchy
family who demanded his metamorphosis.

The theory put forward by Gaillardet, that D’Eon himself confirmed the
general belief in his being a female, is based upon two passages in
letters to Beaumarchais: ‘I admit with pleasure, although with the
pain, the shame, and the tears that the avowal and admission of my own
weakness have wrung from me,’ and, ‘I have made known to you the mystery
of my sex.’ That Beaumarchais seriously believed D’Eon to be a woman
is beyond any manner of doubt, but that D’Eon confessed so much to him
spontaneously, the idea having emanated from himself, is anything but
proved, if proof rests solely on the above two short extracts. Dutens,
styled by D’Eon, ‘mon honorable ami,’ and who was well acquainted
with Beaumarchais (‘j’ai beaucoup connu Beaumarchais’), was told by
the dramatic writer that he was perfectly assured of the sex of the
extraordinary woman—but that was all! And he relates, as he had heard it,
the cause which led to the Chevalier’s change of sex.

The Countess de Guerchy attributed the death of her husband to grief,
consequent upon the ridicule with which he had been covered by the
Chevalier D’Eon, and she warned the Count de Maurepas that if D’Eon dared
to land in France, her son should await him at Calais to fight him, and
if her son fell, she had a son-in-law ready to take his place. Greatly
amused at hearing this, D’Eon was reported to have said: ‘Very well, I
will put an end to all this. I declare I am a woman.’ Unfortunately,
Dutens does not give his authority for this story, the latter part of
which is entirely inconsistent with the impatience we have seen exhibited
by D’Eon to fight young de Guerchy, and to afford him the opportunity for
avenging his father.

If we look at the order of Louis XVI., dated August 25, 1775, instructing
Beaumarchais to recover the papers out of D’Eon’s hands, we find the
latter named in the masculine gender; and although Beaumarchais
distinctly individualises D’Eon as being a woman, in none of de
Vergennes’ despatches is he spoken of otherwise than as if he were a
man, and that minister goes so far as to say that if the Chevalier would
disguise himself—‘si M. D’Eon voulait se travestir’—all should be well.
(See p. 239.)

The author of the attractive and somewhat laborious work, ‘Beaumarchais
et son Temps,’ calls attention to the piquancy in D’Eon’s letters to
Beaumarchais, acting admirably, as he does, the part of a woman concealed
under the guise of a man; at the same time adopting an ambiguous style,
as if with the view of making it clear at any such time eventually as
his fraud would be discovered, that he had been duping so astute a man
as the author of ‘Le Barbier de Seville,’ and that whilst duping him, to
his face, he was also making fun of him, without his being sensible of
it. On the other hand, Beaumarchais amused himself at the expense of the
love-sick _vieille dragonne_, becoming the more confirmed in his error,
as D’Eon continued to counterfeit the wrath of an offended old maid.

The Chevalier’s letters to Louis XVI. (Ch. MSS.) make it sufficiently
clear that the King could not have been positively assured on his
sex. In one letter D’Eon informs his Majesty that he continued to
maintain silence in respect to his position, which was so singular and
extraordinary, as to be without parallel in ancient or modern history.
He had kept his secret profoundly, because it was the secret of secrets
of the late King, and he entreated his Majesty either to allow two
Councillors of State, in whom he had implicit confidence, to write down
his depositions and the proofs to them, before he returned to France, or
permit him to publish his defence.

In another letter, the King is told that the question of sex will soon be
decided, after the Court will have restored the honour and money due to
him. ‘I can then think of settling down, and in marrying, make known to
which sex I belong.’

In a third letter, the Chevalier points out that negotiations for his
return to France were conducted from 1770 to 1775, and that his letter
to the Count de Broglio of January 1775, was sent under flying seal to
the Count de Vergennes, to enable that minister to become well acquainted
with the validity of some of his arguments, and communicate them for his
Majesty’s consideration.

Lacretelle, Taylor, and others, are unable to account for the Chevalier’s
change of sex, otherwise than that it was produced by some unexplained
intrigue, and that he was directed by the French Government to appear as
a woman, for reasons which have never been satisfactorily determined.
Voltaire wrote, that the whole affair puzzled him. He was unable to
picture to himself either D’Eon, or the ministers of his day, or the acts
of Louis XV., or what was passing then (1777). He knew nothing of any of
them. In returning, however, to the pages of Madame Campan, we seem to
find the key to the situation.

    ‘This strange personage,’ says that lady, ‘had for a long time
    solicited permission to return to France, but it was considered
    necessary to spare the family (de Guerchy) he had offended
    the insult it would feel were he to make his appearance; he
    was therefore compelled to resume the costume of a sex to
    which everything is forgiven in France. Anxiety to see his
    native country no doubt influenced him in submitting to such
    a condition; but he had his revenge, for, whilst wearing a
    gown with its long train, and a triple row of sleeves, he bore
    himself and behaved like a grenadier, giving himself an air of
    unmistakable vulgarity.’

Might not every secret in which this mystery was involved have been
hidden in the _valise_ containing ‘papers that had belonged to the King
and Court,’ given to the French minister plenipotentiary by D’Eon, on
February 1, 1792? (See note, p. 264, p. 324.)

The Count de Vergennes, the minister immediately responsible for the
ludicrous innovation, confessed to Beaumarchais his concern lest D’Eon
should make his appearance in France as a man, his enemies being on the
alert, and not likely to forgive him easily for all he had said of them;
and when writing to the Chevalier, two years later, he impressed upon him
the conditions, should he think of returning to his native land. (See p.
283.)

The question has also arisen—Granted that D’Eon was obliged to appear as
a woman, by command of King and ministers, such being the stipulation
for his receiving the royal grant of twelve thousand livres, annually;
why, after the fall of the monarchy and having lost all by the French
Revolution, did he continue in the anomalous character of a female?
We, in England, are able to understand, that to one who had spent so
many years of his life in this country, and had become familiar with
the sentiments and susceptibilities of English men and women, there was
no choice. It had long been known and admitted that the Chevalière had
been treated by French ministers with peculiar harshness, and she was
seen to be reduced to absolute want at the advanced age of sixty-four!
Under circumstances such as these, he must have felt that so long as
he was believed to be a female, commiseration and assistance were to
be expected; but to declare himself a man, after having adopted female
attire and been admitted into the intimacies of female society over a
period of sixteen years, would have been to expose himself—to summary
castigation? That he did not fear; but to what would have been dreaded
infinitely more than famine by one with his antecedents—the ridicule and
scorn of all who knew anything about him; and so he elected to continue
to the end of his days, dressing, writing, and speaking as if he were a
woman, but otherwise conducting himself in all respects with the freedom
belonging to a man.

We adhere to our engagement not to judge the individual who presents
such startling episodes in his life, and contrasts in his character.
It has hitherto been his fate to be classed, it may be said, amongst
the adventurers of which the last century was sufficiently prolific;
these pages will perhaps assist to remove him out of that order and
place him where he should stand—alone, as a physiognomical marvel. We
would in a measure plead for him, in Johnson’s words in behalf of poor
Goldsmith—‘Let not his failings be remembered’—for his faults were but
failings. Of this victim to envy, malice, and all uncharitableness, we
have read clearly enough how sinned against he was, far more than he had
ever himself sinned against others. All he suffered he had to endure
for serving an ungrateful King too faithfully, oblivious that _promesse
des grands n’est pas héritage_, while his attachment to his country
was sublime, entitling him amongst his countrymen at home to Florian’s
epitaph,

    Il vécut toujours _en Angleterre_,
    Mais son cœur fut toujours ici.

Loyal beyond compare, he ever continued true to one and the other,
frequently under unexceptionably trying circumstances, repeating and
again repeating: ‘Comme Français, je puis regarder le sacrifice de ma
fortune comme la dette de mon amour pour le Roi. Comme militaire et
Chevalier de Saint Louis, je dois même lui sacrifier ma vie; mais pour
celui de mon honneur, il n’est pour personne!’




WORKS AND PUBLICATIONS BY THE CHEVALIER D’EON DE BEAUMONT.


Eloge de Marie d’Est, Duchesse de Penthièvre. In the _Année Littéraire_.

Eloge du Comte d’Ons-en-Bray, Président de l’Académie des Sciences à
Paris. In the _Année Littéraire_.

Situation de la France par rapport aux Finances sous le règne de Louis
XIV. et la Régence du Duc d’Orléans. 1753. 8vo.

Mémoire sur la Vie et les Ouvrages de Lenglet Dufresnoy. In the _Année
Littéraire_, 1755.

Considérations Historiques sur les Impôts des Egyptiens, des Babyloniens,
des Perses, des Grecs, des Romains, et sur les différentes situations de
la France, par rapport aux Finances, depuis l’établissement des Francs
dans la Gaule jusqu’à présent. 2 tomes. 1758. 12mo.

Les Espérances d’un bon Patriote (dans une lettre à M. Fréron, et publiée
dans son _Année Littéraire_, 1759, tom. vi.).

Note remise à son Excellence Monsieur le Comte de Guerchy, par Monsieur
le Chevalier D’Eon. 1763.

Lettres, Mémoires et Négotiations Particulières du Chevalier D’Eon,
Ministre Plénipotentiaire de France auprès du Roi de la Grande Bretagne;
avec Mrs. les Ducs de Praslin, de Nivernois, de Sainte-Foy, et Regnier de
Guerchy, etc. etc. Vita sine litteris mors est. A Londres, M.DCC.LXIV. In
4to and 8vo.

Pièces Relatives aux Lettres, Mémoires et Négotiations Particulières du
Chevalier D’Eon, Ministre Plénipotentiaire de France auprès du Roi de la
Grande Bretagne, contenant La Note, Contre-Note, Lettre à Mr. le Duc de
Nivernois, et Examen des Lettres, Mémoires, etc. A Londres, M.DCC.LXIV.
8vo.

Pièces Autentiques pour servir au Procès Criminel intenté au Tribunal
du Roi d’Angleterre par le Chevalier D’Eon de Beaumont, Ministre
Plénipotentiaire de France, contre Claude Louis François Regnier, Comte
de Guerchy, Ambassadeur Extraordinaire de France auprès de Sa Majesté
Britannique. Le trône a-t-il été pour vous associé à l’iniquité? Vous
qui vous servez de l’autorité qui vous a été conférée pour exercer des
injustices. A Londres, 1765. 12mo.

Dernière Lettre du Chevalier D’Eon à M. le Comte de Guerchy, en date du 5
Août 1767, avec l’extrait de la Procédure en bonne forme. Le sacrifice de
ma vie a été et sera pour mon roi et ma patrie; celui de mon honneur ne
sera pour personne. A Londres, 1767. 4to.

Les Loisirs du Chevalier D’Eon de Beaumont, Ancien Ministre
Plénipotentiaire de France, sur Divers Sujets importans d’Administration
etc., pendant Son Séjour en Angleterre. Eruditio inter prospera
ornamentum, inter adversa refugium.—LAERTIUS. A Amsterdam, M.DCC.LXXIV.
13 tom. 8vo.

Recueil des Pièces relatives aux Démêlés entre Mademoiselle D’Eon et M.
de Beaumarchais, imprimées à Londres, 1778. 12mo.

Epître aux Anglois dans leurs tristes Circonstances présentes. 1788. 8vo.


MSS.

Vade Mecum, ou Dictionnaire Portatif de la Créance des Saints Pères,
puisé dans les livres mêmes des Ministres Protestans. Divisé par
Chapîtres et digéré par ordre alphabétique. Ou, Manuel des Chrétiens
catholiques; ou Nomenclature Théologique. pp. 454, 8vo.

Mémoires, Documens, Remarques, Extraits et Notes Instructives, recueillis
par la Chevalière D’Eon, pour servir à la Vie du Comte de Vauban né le 12
Mai 1633, mort Maréchal de France, à Paris, le 30 Mars 1707, âgé de 74
ans.

La chevalière D’Eon s’est occupée long-tems de ce grand Travail; mais
ses anciennes Occupations militaires, politiques et littéraires, sans
compter les querelles d’Allemans et la guerre civile et incivile qu’elle
a soutenue pendant des longues années en Angleterre, ont consommé et
consumé ses plus belles années. Après 36 ans de Travaux militaires et
politiques, elle ne se trouve pas assez riche, et elle est trop vieille
aujourd’hui, pour entreprendre et finir un Ouvrage aussi savant et aussi
considérable etc. etc. etc.




APPENDIX.


They who have seen the face of the _eiserne jungfrau_ in the dread
dungeon of the Inquisition at Nuremberg, even though by the lurid light
of the keeper’s candle-stuffs, will experience little difficulty in
figuring to themselves the habitual expression of the Chevalier D’Eon’s
features, where every sentiment implanted by nature and conveyed in the
open face, intelligent eyes, and well-shaped nose, was subjugated by the
agitated spirit of sarcasm and disdain that kept rippling, as it were,
out of the spacious brow, and overspreading the otherwise attractive
countenance.

In the various portraits herewith described, the Chevalier or Chevalière
D’Eon is represented in female attire except in those marked *.

1. Angelica Kauffmann after Latour. Francis Haward, R.A., sculpsit
(_mezzo-tinto_) published (by the engraver), January 18, 1788, from the
picture in the collection of George Keate, Esq.

Carola Genovefa Louisa Augusta Andrea Timothea D’Eon de Beaumont, Knight
of the Royal and Military Order of St. Louis, Captain of Dragoons and the
Volunteers of the Army, Aide-de-Camp to the Maréchal Duke and Count de
Broglio, Minister Plenipotentiary from the King of France to the King of
Great Britain in 1763. Born at Tonnerre, October 5, 1728. Painted in her
twenty-fifth year. (See p. 14, from a photograph by C. Prætorius.)

To represent D’Eon de Beaumont as a Chevalière of the Royal and Military
Order of Saint Louis at the age of twenty-five, is an anomaly. The cross
in this picture may have been introduced by Angelica Kauffmann[395] when
she copied La Tour’s portrait, or it may have been added many years after
its execution, by La Tour himself, before Angelica Kauffmann saw it. His
biographer gives authority for such a conjecture where he says: ‘Towards
the close of his life, the mind of this artist began to give way. He
vitiated a large number of his works by retracing them, under the pretext
that in a portrait everything should be sacrificed to the head.’

2. *Mackenzie sc. LE CHEVALIER D’EON (beardless).

3. Printed for S. Hooper, 25 Ludgate Hill, 25 January, 1771
(_mezzo-tinto_, full length). The Discovery or Female Free-mason, Lady
Charles Louis Cezar Augustus Alexander Timotheus D’Eon de Beaumont
(here follow style and titles) and accepted free-mason at the lodge of
Immortality at the ‘Crown and Anchor’ in the Strand.

4. *Huquier, pinxt; Burke, fect. Published as the Act directs, August 7,
1771, by I. Wesson. THE CHEVALIER D’EON. (See p. 208, from a photograph
by C. Prætorius.)

5. Published as the Act directs by S. Hooper, Ludgate Hill, 20 March,
1778 (_mezzo-tinto_). Represented as Minerva, with lance and shield,
upon the latter this legend: At nunc dura dedit vobis discrimina Pallas.
On one side: Impavidam ferient ruinæ. A long inscription in English,
concludes: Læsæ sed invictæ Palladi, per bella, per acta publica
in patriæ suæ honorem et famam inclytæ, cujus virtutes nec inimici
vituperare, pauci homines imitari possunt. Exul mi Deone, ne quidem ossa
patria habeat! In perpetuum amoris monumentum offerebant amici sociales
milites.

6. Dessiné et Gravé par J. B. Bradel d’après nature et les Originaux
communiqués par Mademoiselle D’Eon à ce Seul Artiste. Charlotte Geneviève
Louise Auguste Andrée Timothée D’Eon de Beaumont (here follow style and
titles) Ætatis 35.[396] A la Mémoire des Héroines Françoises, Jeanne
D’Arc, Jeanne Hachette, etc. etc.

7. Frontispiece to ‘La Vie Militaire, Politique et Privée de Mademoiselle
D’Eon de Beaumont, etc.’: by de la Fortelle, 1779. LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON DE
BEAUMONT, Née en 1728.

8. A. Stöttrup sc. 1779. Same as 7.

9. Painting in oils, life size. CHEVALIER D’EON, 1782. (See Frontispiece,
from a photograph by Arthur King.)

In a short biographical notice of the Chevalier D’Eon, dated 1812 (?),
at the back of this canvas, allusion being made to the trial on sex
policies, it is asserted—‘Sir Joshua Reynolds was in Court during the
trial and requested the Chevalier to pay him a visit, which he did in
female attire on 4 August, 1777, when this Sketch was taken of the
Chevalier by Sir Joshua, and presented by him in 1782 to his friend Sir
Wm. Chambers.’

According to this statement, the signature to which is indistinct,
the sketch of the Chevalier was taken when in his fiftieth year, and
completed in 1782, the date inscribed by the artist to the left of the
figure, whilst the Chevalière, then in her fifty-sixth year, was residing
in France!

This picture is now the property of General Meredith Read, New York,
U.S.A.

10. Dupin (Pierre?) artist and engraver.
Charles-Geneviève-Louis-Auguste-César-André-Timothée D’Eon de Beaumont,
née à Tonnerre, en 1728 (here follow style and titles). A Paris chez
Esnauts et Rapilly.

11. Peint par Ducreux, de l’Académie Impériale et Royale de Vienne. Gravé
par Cathelin, de l’Académie Royale de Peinture et Sculpture à Paris. Læsæ
sed invictæ Palladi. Name, style, and titles close with.... plus célèbre
encore par sa Vertu que par son nom. Pensionnaire de Louis XV. et de
Louis XVI. Née à Tonnerre, le 5 8ᵇʳᵉ, 1728, Ætatis 58.

12. Cosway, R.A., 1787. Thos. Chambers sculpsit. Published July 12, 1787.
LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON.

13. Painted by Robineau. Engraved by V. M. Picot. From a picture of
Robineau’s in the possession of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.
Published June 20, 1789, by V. M. Picot. Dedicated by Permission to His
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales. The assault or Fencing-Match which
took place between Mademoiselle La Chevalière D’Eon de Beaumont and
Monsieur de Saint-George, on the 9th of April, 1787, at Carlton House,
in the presence of His Royal Highness, several of the Nobility, and many
eminent Fencing Masters of London.

14. J. Condé delin. et sculp. LA CHEVALIÈRE D’EON, née à Tonnerre, le 5
8ᵇʳᵉ, 1728.

15. Published by I. Sewell, March 1, 1791 (for the ‘European Magazine’).
Same as 14.

16. Medallion portrait. Vigil audax—by J. Condé, published June 24, 1791,
upon the occasion of the entertainment given by the Managers of Ranelagh
for the benefit of the Chevalière D’Eon ... deprived of a considerable
part of her fortune by the odious detention of a deposit. Minerve
Gauloise, née a Tonnerre, le 5 8ᵇʳᵉ, 1728. Proprio Marte Tuta. The French
artist who engraved this plate designed it for a monument of English
generosity and French gratitude.

    Dic mihi, Virgo ferox, cum sit tibi cassis et hasta,
      Quare non habeas Ægida? Cæsar habet.
    Pax est fœminei generis, dat fœmina pacem;
      Quæ Bellona fuit nunc Dea pacis erit.

17. Dance, R.A., 26 May, 1793. Engraved by William Daniell, August 15,
1810. THE CHEVALIÈRE D’EON. This profile, to the left, was drawn at the
request of Mr. W. Seward, F.R.S.

18. Robert Cooper sculp. Published July 2, 1810, by J. Bell, Southampton
Street, Strand. Engraved for La Belle Assemblée. Same as 14.

19. From a Cast taken after death. Engraved by C. Turner from the Cast
taken May 24, 1810, in the presence of J. C. Carpuc, Esq. and Dr.
Pearson. Published June 29, 1810, by C. Turner. THE CHEVALIER D’EON.

A tinted engraving of the _torso_, from a drawing by C. Turner, was
published with the surgical attestation (see p. 331) by C. Turner, June
14, 1810. This print was never sold publicly, and was not to be obtained
without an order from a magistrate.


CARICATURES.

In September 1777 was executed for the ‘London Magazine’—Mademoiselle
de Beaumont, or the Chevalier D’Eon. Female Minister Plenipo., Capt. of
Dragoons, etc. etc.—a full-length figure, the right half being a lady
holding a fan, and the left half a man in uniform, with hat under the arm.

In Paris was published a print similar to the above, illustrating both
sexes, inscribed—Dédié aux dragons de l’armée.

Another sketch that appeared in London, in 1778, represented the right
half of a dragoon, with drawn sword in hand, back to back with the right
half of a lady.

    Hail! Thou production most uncommon,
    Woman half-man and man half-Woman!

In a caricature, by Gillray, of the Assaut d’armes at Carlton House in
April 1787 (see pp. 308, 367), we see ‘the Chevalière D’Eon making a
successful thrust and hitting Saint George in his right arm. A railing
divides the combatants from a highly select audience, in which the Prince
of Wales occupies the post of honour, while Mrs. Fitzherbert sits on his
right hand, and a crowd of political and fashionable worthies exhibit the
greatest interest in the contest.’

Other ludicrous drawings of this fencing-match made their appearance at
about the same time.

Needless to observe that the Chevalière D’Eon did not escape being made
the subject of foul and obscene illustrations, in the same way in which
it had become the fashion to treat the most distinguished and highest in
the land!




FOOTNOTES


[1] Accused of being a fanatic, Eon de l’Estoile was committed to prison
by the Council of Rheims on March 22, 1148, and died a few days later of
the ill-treatment to which he was subjected by those in whose charge he
was placed. See De Bois de la Chesnaye’s _Genealogical Dictionary_, for
the D’Eon family.

[2] Ch. MSS. 161.

[3] Ch. MSS.

[4] De la Fortelle, 126.

[5] Ch. MSS.

[6] Rede’s _Anecdotes and Biography_. London, 1779.

[7] Valcroissant obtained his liberty after a twelvemonth’s confinement,
through the instrumentality of D’Eon. _Lett. Mém._ &c. 1, 5.

[8] _Russia Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[9] Gaill. 373-377.

[10] This correspondence, arranged by Woronzoff and D’Eon, was not fully
commenced until 1757. See _Mémoire_ on the Secret Correspondence in
Russia, 1757-1774, by the Count de Broglio. Boutaric, ii. 465.

[11] D’Eon to the Count de Vergennes, May 28, 1776: _Archives des
affaires étrangères_. Gaill. 23. D’Eon to Louis XVI.: Ch. MSS. 861.

[12] _Russia Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[13] See Argument.

[14] _Russia Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[15] Campan, i. 190

[16] Note Book, dated 1754: Ch. MSS.

[17] Elizabeth was much prepossessed in favour of the English. Being a
great admirer of their fashions, and wishing to introduce them at her
Court, she had dolls sent to her in the various dresses worn, and which
were fitted by Miss Church of St. James’s Street.

[18] _Russia Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[19] A tradition exists to the effect that Count Woronzoff’s palace in
the Sadovaya Oulitza, St. Petersburg, now occupied by the Corps des
Pages, was constructed with English guineas. Later, in 1758, the count
received a gratuity of fifty thousand roubles from Louis XV.

[20] In acknowledging the receipt of despatches of May 12 and 18, brought
to Paris by Michel the merchant, M. Rouillé warmly congratulates Douglas,
in the name of the King, by letter dated June 18, on the distinction
with which he had been received by the Ministers of Russia and even the
Empress herself.—Copies of _French Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[21] _Russia Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[22] _Lett. Mém._ &c., iii. 6.

[23] Copies of _French Correspondence_ in _Russia Correspondence_, Public
Record Office.

[24] Prince Tcheckbatoff says of Apraxin: The field-marshal was entirely
devoid of military talents. Whilst awaiting orders at Riga he astonished
the people by his display of wealth, and when moving with the army
indulged in all the comforts and luxuries to be found only in a large
city, and this in the midst of the sound of arms or in fatiguing marches.
His tents extended over the space of a small town, five hundred horses
being required to transport his baggage. Apraxin was a heavy, unwieldy
man, fond of ladies’ society. Apraxin is described by Sir Hanbury
Williams as very corpulent, lazy, luxurious, and certainly not brave.

[25] M. Wolkhoff to D’Eon, April 15/27, 1757. _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 6.
_Gazette d’Utrecht_, xiii. 1757.

[26] D’Eon to the Count de Broglio, June 12, 1775: _Archives des affaires
étrangères_. Gaill. 71.

[27] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 48.

[28] Boutaric, i. 222, 223.

[29] Poutaric, i. 86, 224. Vandal, 307.

[30] _Napoléon I. auteur du testament de Pierre le Grand_: par G.
Berkholz. (Bruxelles, à l’Office de Publicité, 1863.)

[31] Terms not understood.

[32] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 9.

[33] Vandal, 327.

[34] _Russia Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[35] This is the fifth or sixth minister who is anxious to make my
fortune. Fortune, however, unhappily wears a wig, and is continually
slipping away from my grasp. The next time we meet I shall seize her by
the hair.—Note by D’Eon.

[36] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 11.

[37] De la Fortelle, 33.

[38] Note-book, dated 1754: Ch. MSS.

[39] Loménie, i. 414.

[40] Ch. MSS. In his _Mémoires Secrets_, &c. (London, 1781), Petit de
Bachaumont states that D’Eon was sent as fencing-master to the Grand-Duke
Peter, who had wished for one; a piece of information he obtained in all
probability from the Count de Guerchy, who told George III. a similar
story. He adds that D’Eon was at the same time entrusted to arrange
with the grand-duke for the reception of a French ambassador at St.
Petersburg; as manifest an absurdity, there being at the Russian Court no
person more hostile to French interests than Peter.

[41] La Messalière, 77.

[42] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 14.

[43] Gaill. 74.

[44] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 15.

[45] An English version of portions of this work appeared in the
_Political Register_ for 1766, &c.

[46] Vandal, 348 _et seq._

[47] Duke de Choiseul to Count Bernstorff, July 29, 1759. ‘Si j’étais
maître,’ de Choiseul used to say, ‘nous serions vis-à-vis de l’Angleterre
comme l’Espagne vis-à-vis des Maures; si l’on prenait ce parti,
l’Angleterre serait détruite d’ici à trente ans.’ Louis XV. thought
differently.

[48] Private, from the Duke de Choiseul to the Marquis de l’Hôpital,
October 2, 1759. Vandal, 360.

[49] D’Eon to Louis XVI.: Ch. MSS. 861.

[50] D’Eon to Beaumarchais, January 7, 1776. Gaill. 406.

[51] Secret instructions to the Baron de Breteuil, April 1, 1760.
_Affaires étrangères_, Vandal, 373.

[52] Ch. MSS.

[53] Vandal, 265 _et seq._

[54] Flassan, vi. 289.

[55] Flassan, vi. 190.

[56] A distinguished physician at the French Court, sent by Louis XV. to
attend upon the Empress, who had complained to the King of her physical
sufferings.

[57] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 17.

[58] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 19-20.

[59] De la Fortelle, 40. Writing under the persuasion that D’Eon was of
the female sex, Flassan, vi. 110, says:—‘Woronzoff and D’Eon were the
intermediaries in the correspondence between Louis XV. and Elizabeth.’
Capefigue, _Louis XV. et la Société du XVIIIᵐᵉ Siècle_, Paris, 1842,
says, iv. 32: ‘By means of his renown, D’Eon was enabled to accomplish
the most delicate and most difficult missions ... his correspondence with
Louis XV. is eminently remarkable ... he was chiefly instrumental in
arranging the treaty of alliance between France and Russia.’

[60] French ambassador at Vienna, afterwards created Duke de Praslin.

[61] _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 24.

[62] Louis XV. to the Count de Broglio, May 31, 1761. Boutaric, i. 265.

[63] De Broglie, i. 384.

[64] See _Scots Mag._ vol. xxiii. for Marshal de Broglio’s account of
this action.

[65] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 145.

[66] D’Eon to the Duke de Choiseul, January 12, 1764, and MS. notes.
_Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 145.

[67] Louis XV. to Marshal de Broglio. De Broglie, i. 438.

[68] I would here say what I have said to my generals, that the
success of this little enterprise is due chiefly to the Chev. de la
Tulley, Captain of the de la Ferronaye dragoons, and to M. Casette,
formerly Lieutenant of the d’Autichamp dragoons. Note by D’Eon, _Pièces
Relatives_, &c. 31.

[69] The Count de Broglio to Louis XV., February 19, 1762, and March 24,
1758. De Broglie, ii. 5; i. 300.

[70] The Marquis de l’Hôpital had retired the preceding autumn.

[71] Louis XV. to Tercier, June 1, June 19, July 28, 1762. Boutaric, i.
274, 275, 277. D’Eon received a gratuity of three thousand livres from
the King (probably as a salve to the disappointment he must have felt at
missing promotion). Louis XV. to Tercier, August 31, 1762. _Ibid._ i. 278.

[72] D’Eon to the Count de Broglio, July 1, 1762. De Broglie, ii. 105.
Peter III. was assassinated July 14, 1762.

[73] Madame Campan, the contemporary who notices the employment of D’Eon
as reader to Elizabeth, employs the term _lecteur_. I do not know on what
equally reliable authority the duke uses the word _lectrice_.

[74] De Broglie, ii. 607. I have not been able to consult the original
work.

[75] Peter III.

[76] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 382.

[77] Countess Catherine Woronzoff was the maiden name of this lady.

[78] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 104.

[79] _Lett. Mém._ &c. MS. notes, 99, 101.

[80] The Duke de Choiseul, during whose ministry (1764) the Jesuits were
expelled from France, the Order being wisely suppressed by Clement XIV.
in 1773.

[81] _Lett. Mém._ &c. MS. note, i. v. Junius taunts the Duke of Grafton
on his wife’s infidelity. This lady, a daughter of Lord Ravensworth,
obtained a divorce from the duke in 1769, and was afterwards married to
the Earl of Ossory.

[82] The Duke de Nivernois to the Duke de Praslin, January 12, 1763. De
Broglie, ii. 107. Gaill. 92.

[83] _European Mag._ vol. xiv.

[84] The Duke de Nivernois to the Duke de Praslin, October 2, November
14, 1762. _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 246.

[85] The signatories were—the Duke of Bedford, the Duke de Praslin, and
the Marquis Grimaldi.

[86] D’Eon left London with the ratifications of the definite treaty on
February 23rd, and delivered them to the Duke of Bedford on the 26th.
_France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[87] The Duke de Nivernois was little aware that he was saying a great
truth. Note by D’Eon.

[88] The Duke de Nivernois Correspondence. _Lett. Mém._ &c.

[89] The Duke de Nivernois Correspondence. _Lett. Mém._ &c.

[90] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[91] January 8, 1763. _Lett. Mém._ &c. iii. 74.

[92] The Duke de Nivernois Correspondence. _Lett. Mém._ &c.

[93] _Mém. de la Chevalière D’Eon._ Gaill. 115.

[94] De Pompadour.

[95] Ch. MSS. 951.

[96] De Broglie, ii. 105.

[97] Written _circa_ 1806. The Count de Broglio died in 1781.

[98] Ch. MSS. 814, 767. ‘Preamble to Will.’

[99] This highly esteemed order, instituted in 1693 by Louis XIV., fell
in abeyance in 1830.

[100] The presents, valued at fifty thousand crowns, consisted of his
Majesty’s portrait set in diamonds, a costly Savonnerie carpet, and
superb Gobelin tapestry. They were shown by Lord Bute to the King, who
considered they were magnificent, and the letter charming.

[101] De Broglie, ii. 97.

[102] Boutaric, i. 295.

[103] July 27, 1763; _ibid._ i. 297.

[104] ‘His brain of whipped cream enclosed within a head of Rouen
porcelain, relates pleasantly a quantity of tittle-tattle, accompanied
by little nothings.’—D’Eon on the Duke de Choiseul. Ch. MSS.: ‘Comparing
what has passed between the Duke de Choiseul and us at different times,
there does not appear to have been the same frankness and veracity in the
latter part of this negotiation as we had hitherto experienced in that
minister.’—Duke of Bedford to the Karl of Egremont, Paris, February 16,
1763. _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[105] _Tête de dragon._

[106] May 17, 1763. De Broglie, ii. 119.

[107] Boutaric, i. 293.

[108] Regnier, Count de Guerchy, was frequently admitted into the
private apartments of the Pompadour. He never missed the opportunity for
replacing on her foot her fallen slipper, or carrying her candlestick to
her small boudoir or private closet. Such little services were of great
weight in the mind of de Pompadour and of every Messaline at Court. Ch.
MSS. ‘Preamble to Will.’

[109] Gaill. 117. The Duke de Broglie maintains (_Le Secret du Roi_, ii.
138) that not a word of this pretty tale can be accepted as true—in the
first place, because in the year 1763, de Pompadour, already in failing
health, enjoyed in appearance only the honours to which she had been
accustomed; and because the discovery of the secret by de Pompadour, on
becoming known to Tercier, would have been immediately communicated by
that gentleman to the Count de Broglio, amongst whose papers is not to
be found the least trace of any reference to so important an incident.
The duke’s assumptions, unsupported by counter-evidence, do not appear to
justify his unqualified rejection of the story. His Grace deplores more
than once the want of other papers, for the absence of which he is unable
to account.

[110] Later, in the Musée des Souverains.

[111] _Mém. de la Chevalière D’Eon._ Gaill. 117.

[112] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[113] D’Eon to the Count de Broglio, July 21, 1763. De Broglie, ii. 125.

[114] Treyssac de Vergy to the Duke de Choiseul, p. 25. _Pièces
Relatives_, &c.

[115] De Praslin, who was exceedingly lean, took a great dislike to fat
people. The first time he saw Favier, secretary to the Count de Broglio,
a man of stout proportions, he said, ‘You appear to me to be a worthless
fellow, for you are very fat.’ This fat and a good appetite was the cause
of all that worthy man’s misfortunes at the hands of Praslin.... The
best thing he can do to recover the good graces of the duke is to die of
consumption. Note by D’Eon. See Boutaric, for de Praslin’s persecutions
of this man.

[116] The Duke de Nivernois Correspondence. _Lett. Mém._ &c.

[117] A Testament _ab irato_ is one drawn up under the influence of
choler; it is not only null and void according to custom and written law,
but it is rescinded and destroyed in the Parliament of Paris. Note by
D’Eon.

[118] ‘Eight’ in 4to. and 8vo. editions of _Lett. Mém._ &c.; altered by
D’Eon to ‘nine.’ Ch. MSS.

[119] De Broglie, ii. 122.

[120] The mistress of the Prince de Conti, and aspiring to be his wife.
Walpole describes her as being an Anglomane.

[121] Ch. MSS. 977.

[122] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i.

[123] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[124] Autograph letter. Boutaric, i. 298.

[125] Campan, i. 190.

[126] De Broglie, ii. 139.

[127] D’Eon MSS. Gaill. 128.

[128] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[129] Ch. MSS. 782.

[130] ‘You will see by my letter of yesterday that I was aware of the
Sieur D’Eon’s recall....’—Louis XV. to Tercier, October 12, 1763.
Boutaric, i. 299. It seems clear enough that the order of recall did not
originate with the King. How just were the Chevalier’s conclusions!

[131] Ch. MSS. 789, 769, 946.

[132] Ch. MSS.

[133] _Lett. Mém._, &c. xxxiii. MS. notes.

[134] No authorised duel had taken place in France since the reign of
Henri II., when La Châteigneraie was killed in single combat with Jarnac.
A decree of the Legislative Assembly, dated September 17, 1792, abolished
prosecution for duelling, and rescinded all punishments for duels fought
after July 14, 1789. Since 1832-33, the Court of Cassation has decreed
death at a duel to be murder anticipated by the law.

[135] ‘High words arose at a nobleman’s house in Great George Street
between two foreign gentlemen, and some hard expressions dropping, a
challenge ensued; but the company present interposing, and a party of the
Guards being sent for, further mischief was prevented.’ _Scots Magazine_,
vol. xxv.; _Daily Advertiser_, October 28, 1763, and other newspapers.

[136] _Note_, &c. 16.

[137] _Lettre d’un Français à M. le Duc de Nivernois à Paris_ (October
1763, by M. Goudard.) 2. _Lettre à M. de la M——, Ecuyer_, &c. (by M.
Treyssac de Vergy, November 19, 1763) D’Eon sent copies to the Duke de
Choiseul, ‘that he might have an idea of the real liberty enjoyed in
England.’

[138] The Count de Guerchy to the Duke de Choiseul, November 12, 1763.—De
Broglie, ii. 151.

[139] See p. 76 for these terms.

[140] D’Eon acquits the Countess of having had any part in the plot
against his life. Of a house rendered illustrious by its virtues and
courage, she would never have consented to such an act. Was she to be
reproached for having married an unknown poisoner? She was, perhaps,
to be reproached for avarice and ugliness, but for this, nature was to
blame. As for her soul it was pure and Christian.—‘Preamble to Will.’ Ch.
MSS.

[141] Ch. MSS. 737.

[142] Boutaric, i. 299-310.

[143] Boutaric, i. 302, 303.

[144] Boutaric, i. 302-304.

[145] De Broglio, ii. 148.

[146] Ch. MSS. 786.

[147] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[148] Ch. MSS. 669. So late as September 1764, the Chevalier made a
declaration before his friend Sir John Fielding, and other magistrates,
to the effect that with the support of a band of men he was retaining for
the purpose, he should resist by force any attempt on the part of the
French constables to kidnap him. The house, 32 Brewer Street, remains
unchanged.

[149] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 109.

[150] ‘D’Eon has replied by putting it (the order) into his
pocket.’—Louis XV. to Tercier, December 30, 1763. Boutaric, i. 310.

[151] Boutaric, i. 307.

[152] Boutaric, i. 309.

[153] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[154] Old newspapers.

[155] See p. 53.

[156] The Count de Broglio to Louis XV., December 6, 1763. De Broglie,
ii. 155.

[157] Chevalier, or as he was sometimes called Doctor, O’Gorman, related
to the Thomond family, was married in 1757 to D’Eon’s sister, whose dowry
was a valuable property in Burgundy. O’Connell maintained he had thereby
spoiled his pedigree. Roche, who was well acquainted with him, describes
his stature as exceeding six feet five inches. O’Gorman spent his time
in genealogical studies, when not more profitably employed in Ireland,
selling the produce of his wife’s vineyards.

[158] _Lett. Mém._ &c. i. 124.

[159] De Broglie, ii. 153.

[160] See p. 119.

[161] _Note remise à Son Excellence Monsieur le Comte de Guerchy, par
Monsieur le Chevalier D’Eon_ (November 30, 1763).

[162] Lines on the Duke de Choiseul, to whom D’Eon was much attached,
written after his exile:—

    ‘Dans ses traités et dans sa vie
    Régnent la droiture et l’honneur;
    L’Europe connaît son génie,
    Et les infortunés son cœur.
    Comme tout autre dans sa place,
    Il dut avoir des ennemis;
    Comme nul autre, en sa disgrâce
    Il acquit de nouveaux amis.’—(Ch. MSS.)

[163] _Contre-Note ou Lettre à Monsieur le Marquis L——, à Paris_ (by M.
Goudard, December 1763).

[164] Ch. MSS.

[165] Ch. MSS. 667.

[166] Walpole to the Earl of Hertford, March 27, 1764, and more besides
in a letter to Charles Churchill, Esq., March 27, 1764.

[167] D’Eon to the Duke de Nivernois, February 15, 1764, and to the Duke
de Choiseul, same date. Gaill. 163.

[168] See p. 76.

[169] Colonel Nardin had been employed by Louis XV. to watch over the
security of D’Eon and his papers.

[170] According to the terms of the late treaty, the town and port
of Dunkirk were to be restored to the state fixed by the treaty of
Aix-la-Chapelle and other treaties, and particularly the lunette should
be destroyed immediately after the exchange of ratifications, as well as
the forts and batteries which defended the entrance from the sea. The
work proceeded so slowly, that it was considered it would take seven
years to complete; eventually all the fortifications were demolished by
September 1764.

[171] This offer amounted to 20,000_l._

[172] Boutaric, i. 313.

[173] Louis XV. to Tercier, December 30, 1763; March 25, 1764. Boutaric,
i. 311, 316.

[174] Louis XV. to Tercier, December 30, 1763. _Ibid._ 311.

[175] ‘This letter was addressed to the Rev. Father Loris, Rue du Regard,
and was sent to me by his Majesty on April 5, 1764.’ Endorsement in the
hand of Tercier. Loris was probably a fictitious name. _Ibid._ 317.

[176] ‘The Sieur de Nort will leave for England as soon as he receives
my orders to that effect through the Count de Broglio, and he will
strictly comply with the instructions he will receive from him in my
name, and in behalf of my service, so that he may be guided in his
proceedings, whether as regards the Sieur D’Eon, or the Count de Guerchy,
my ambassador. He will also execute whatever he may receive by word of
mouth, or in writing, from the Sieur Tercier on this subject, and will
preserve the most profound silence on this mission towards everybody,
without any exception, but the persons above named.’—Louis XV. to M. de
Nort, Versailles, April 9, 1764. Boutaric, i. 319.

[177] In 1769, after the destruction of the Bastille, D’Eon wrote a
letter to Lord Stanhope, as President of the Revolution Society, and
presented him with a stone from its ruins.

[178] Plans for the invasion of England.

[179] The Marquise de Pompadour died April 15, 1764, ‘d’une maladie de
cœur,’ says Guizot.

[180] _Mém. de la Chevalière D’Eon_, Ministère des affaires
étrangères.—De Broglie, ii. 173.

[181] ‘The foreign ministers agreed, as to be sure you have been told,
to make Monsieur de Guerchy’s _cause commune_.’—Walpole to the Earl of
Hertford, April 20, 1764. See _Pièces Relatives_, &c. p. 218.

[182] ‘I do not wish that any steps should be taken to arrest the
judicial proceedings commenced.’—Louis XV. to Tercier, May 1, 1764.
Boutaric, i. 322.

[183] May 15, 1764. _Mém. de la Chevalière D’Eon._—De Broglie, ii. 174.

[184] _Examen des Lettres, Mémoires, et Négotiations Particulières
du Chevalier D’Eon, Ministre Plénipotentiaire de France auprès du
Roi de la Grande Bretagne, dans une Lettre à M. N——_, 1764, pp. 52.
Goudard received twenty guineas from the ambassador for his work, and
was arrested at the instance of Becket, printer, in the Strand, for
non-payment of expenses!

[185] Ch. MSS.

[186] Ch. MSS.

[187] De Guerchy’s treatment of D’Eon de Mouloise, lieutenant of cavalry,
a cousin of D’Eon, one of the secret agents sent by Louis XV. to watch
over the safety of the Chevalier and his papers, was scandalous and cruel.

[188] Lords of the Treasury to Lord Halifax, May, 1, 1764.—_France
Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[189] Lord Halifax to Lord Hertford, July 5, 1764.—_France
Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[190] D’Eon to the Count de Broglio, June 8, 1764.—Ministère des affaires
étrangères. De Broglie, ii. 175.

[191] When in Paris Walpole saw this beast, which he declared to be a
wolf of enormous proportions.

[192] Ch. MSS. 480.

[193] This was a singular case of kidnapping. The Marquis de Fratteau had
been carried out of France and imprisoned in Spain on account of some
family quarrel, but having made his escape, he fled to England. On March
27, 1752, a marshal’s court officer called at his apartments in London,
and presented a writ. Having consulted the French pastor, who recommended
him to go quietly, since some mistake had surely been made, he did so.
Upon his disappearance becoming known, Justice Fielding granted a warrant
on the supposition that the marquis was murdered, and an application was
also made to prevent his being carried out of the kingdom. It was all
to no purpose, for he was put on board of a small vessel at Gravesend,
conveyed to Calais where he was landed during the night of the 29th, and
thence sent on to the Bastille.—_Scots Magazine_, xiv. 212.

[194] _The Times_, May 26, 1810, and old newspapers.

[195] Ch. MSS.

[196] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. xxxiv. and old newspapers.

[197] De Guerchy left for France under pretence of reviewing the regiment
of which he was colonel.

[198] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[199] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[200] _Scots Magazine_, vol. xxvi.; from London papers.

[201] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. xxxv. It was absurdly reported that
D’Eon was to be delivered to France in exchange for Wilkes.

[202] _Lettre aux Français, par M. Treyssac de Vergy, en réponse à une
Note, Contre-Note, etc., et servant à la justification de M. D’Eon_:
Londres, 16 Décembre, 1763.

    _Dicere verum quis vetat,_
    _Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?_

Londres: Se vend chez W. Nicoll, St. Paul’s Churchyard.

[203] _Seconde Lettre à Monseigneur le Duc de Choiseul, Ministre et
Secrétaire d’Etat en France; par M. Treyssac de Vergy, Avocat au
Parlement de Bordeaux_. ‘_Solventur risu tabulæ, tu missus abibis._’
Hor.—1764, pp. 38. De Vergy was sworn before William Bridgen Major, Lord
Mayor of London, by George Schuts, Notary Public, on October 11, 1764,
that he was the author of two letters in manuscript addressed to the Duke
de Choiseul—which letters, with the attestations of the Lord Mayor and
Notary Public, were afterwards published for general circulation.

[204] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[205] The interlineations were in sympathetic ink.

[206] The French ambassador had been in France on leave of absence.

[207] Boutaric, i. 322.

[208] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[209] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office.

[210] Afterwards minister under Louis XVI.

[211] Boutaric, i. 334-337.

[212] Louis XV. to Tercier, January 14 to February 6, 1765. Boutaric, i.
334-339. De Broglie, ii. 188.

[213] Ch. MSS.

[214] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. XXXV.

[215] David Hume was doing duty as secretary of Embassy in Paris.

[216] The Count de Broglio to Louis XV., March 22, 1765. De Broglie, ii.
194.

[217] This arrangement requires explanation. At the time of the Hugonnet
incident, de Broglio, full of concern lest the history of the secret
correspondence, in which he was the most prominently concerned, should
become generally known, and rather than that any such other accident
should occur, expressed to the King his readiness to proceed to London,
and to guarantee, by a mortgage on his own estates, the annual pension
to D’Eon of 12,000 livres, by way of effectually obtaining from him the
desired papers. Louis XV. had the meanness to approve of this security on
his royal word, and this proposed settlement being communicated to the
Chevalier, he readily acquiesced, save that he required the mortgage to
extend to the estates of the countess, which were larger than those of
her husband.

[218] D’Eon to the Count de Broglio, April 1, 1765. De Broglie, ii. 194.

[219] The Duke and Duchess of Burgundy, father and mother of Louis XV.,
died of the measles (?) within six days of each other; it was long
believed they had been poisoned.

[220] Preamble to Will. Ch. MSS.

[221] Letter 387, April 22, 1765.

[222] D’Argental’s words to de Vergy as they appear in the brochure,
p. 25, are: ‘Je l’ai assuré [de Guerchy] que vous vous prêteriez à ses
projets; et que, suivant les circonstances, vous vous serviriez aussi
bien de l’épée que de la plume.’

[223] _Political Register_, September 1767. _London Evening Post_, and
other old newspapers. The Duke de Broglie gives a different account of de
Guerchy’s extrication out of his difficulty.

[224] D’Eon to the Duke de Choiseul, July 4, 1767, published with
_Dernière Lettre du Chevalier D’Eon à M. le Comte de Guerchy, &c._

[225] The seat of Humphrey Cotes, Esq.

[226] Ch. MSS. 695.

[227] _Ibid._ 298.

[228] July 22, 1765. De Broglie, ii. 198.

[229] _Archives des affaires étrangères._ Gaill. 182. De Broglie, ii. 204.

[230] These papers were afterwards lodged with Earl Ferrers.

[231] _France Correspondence_, Public Record Office. John Rice, a London
broker, having absconded in December 1762, was arrested at Cambray, and
being taken to England was tried for forgery, convicted, and executed at
Tyburn the following May.

[232] Ch. MSS. 36.

[233] See p. 77.

[234] De Broglie, ii. 199.

[235] Preamble to Will. Ch. MSS. Of de Guerchy’s father D’Eon relates
the following anecdote: At Madame de Sévigné’s house in Paris one
evening, the guests entertained each other by telling their dreams of the
preceding night. ‘I dreamt’, said the old count, who was a very wealthy
man, ‘that I was the Golden Calf.’ ‘J’en suis persuadée,’ observed the
hostess, ‘il n’y a que la dorure de trop.’

[236] _Dernière lettre du Chevalier D’Eon à M. le Comte de Guerchy, en
date du 5 Août, 1767, avec l’extrait de la Procédure en bonne forme_ [qui
a été imprimé en un vol. in 4to en 1765, le Comte de Guerchy étant alors
Ambassadeur de France à Londres]. _Le sacrifice de ma vie a été et sera
pour mon roi et ma patrie; celui de mon honneur ne sera pour personne. A
Londres, 1767._ The words in brackets are in D’Eon’s hand, on the copy
consulted by the author.

[237] De Vergy’s body, enclosed in a leaden coffin, was kept at the
undertaker’s in Church Street, St. Ann, and not interred at St. Pancras
_until the following March_! He desired that his remains should be
removed to the family vault at Bordeaux, but his widow, although in easy
circumstances, persisted in refusing to supply the necessary funds.

[238] By the untimely death of this nobleman in the hunting-field, in
March 1767, the Chevalier lost a kind and sympathetic supporter. He was
the author of the epitaph inscribed on the Marquis’ tomb at Chenies.

[239] _Archives des affaires étrangères._ Gaill. 388.

[240] October 7-9, 1766.

[241] Paper of October 23-25, 1766.

[242] Dr. Musgrave had practised in Paris, and was known for the
publication of some tragedies of Euripides. ‘A weak and credulous man.’
He died in 1780.

[243] Solicitor to her Majesty the Queen, and later, Lord Chief Justice.

[244] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. xxxix.

[245] The charges were declared in Parliament to be ‘frivolous’; yet Lord
Camden was not to be persuaded, even when years had passed, that there
had been no foundation whatever for them.

[246] _European Magazine_, 1791.

[247] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. xxxix.

[248] B.M. MSS.

[249] An incident in Spanish affairs further explained by D’Eon in his
letter to the Count de Broglio of July 7, 1774, which see.

[250] Louis XV. to the Count de Broglio, May 5, 1768. Boutaric, i. 354,
361.

[251] _Les Loisirs du Chevalier D’Eon de Beaumont, ancien
Ministre Plénipotentiaire de France, sur divers sujets importants
d’Administration, &c._, 13 vols. 8vo., Amsterdam, 1774.

[252] _The Public Advertiser_, March 21, 1774.

[253] _London Evening Post_, July 21-23, 1774.

[254] _Records of my Life_, i. 338. London, 1832.

[255] The Count de Broglio had been at the head of the Secret
Correspondence Department since the death of Tercier in January 1767.

[256] B.M. MSS.

[257] March 25, April 16, May 7, 1771. These letters, all in cypher, were
addressed to M. Koppfing, banker, Rue Quincampoix, Paris. _Archives des
affaires étrangères._ Gaill. 190.

[258] Of June 20, 1771.

[259] On June 29, 1771.

[260] London, July 5, 1771. _Archives des affaires étrangères._ Gaill.
194.

[261] May 11, 1772. Boutaric, i. 430.

[262] _European Magazine_, vol. xix. The Falkland Islands were taken
possession of by Captain Byron in 1765, and garrisoned in the following
year. Spain demanded their evacuation in 1769, which, not being complied
with, the English in occupation were attacked and made prisoners. War was
averted by the King of Spain disowning the acts of his commander.

[263] For this name, see p. 175.

[264] De Broglie, ii. 556, note.

[265] Angelo, ii. 53.

[266] This letter, dated September 24, 1773, was signed William Wolff.
Gaill. 197. Boutaric, ii. 442.

[267] Ch. MSS. 734.

[268] Louis XV. died May 10, 1774. His three daughters were more
familiarly known as nicknamed by their father, _Loque_, _Chiffe_, and
_Graille_, interpreted into English, as Rag, Tag, and Bobtail.

[269] _Hist. des Français_, xxix. 507. Dutens, ii. 55. _Vie privée de
Louis XV. &c._ iv. 195.

[270] Ch. MSS. 117, 961, 975, 948.

[271] May 23, 1774. This letter is not in Boutaric. It was found amongst
the count’s papers by the Duke de Broglie. De Broglie, ii. 525.

[272] See p. 185.

[273] The Count de Broglio to Louis XVI., May 30, 1774. Boutaric, ii. 392.

[274] De Broglie, ii. 533.

[275] This minister was admitted to the secret correspondence of Louis
XV. in 1755, on appointment as ambassador at Constantinople.

[276] Spanish ambassador in London.

[277] Louis XV.

[278] See p. 77.

[279] July 7, 1774. Boutaric, ii. 434.

[280] This was the largest pension about to be conferred upon any of the
secret agents, with one exception, that of General Mokronosky, ‘a Polish
patriot,’ who was awarded twenty thousand livres a year.

[281] La Chalotais, _procureur-général_ of the Parliament of Brittany,
arrested on a charge of having written seditious letters to the King.
Although falsely accused, he was exiled by Louis XV., but recalled and
reinstated by Louis XVI.

[282] Ch. MSS. 859.

[283] _London Evening Post_, April 18-20, 1775.

[284] Containing a detailed statement of his claims.

[285] Boutaric, ii. 444-445.

[286] ‘The Campaigns of the Sieur Caron de Beaumarchais in England
during the years 1774, 1775 and 1776; or, a Summary of what preceded and
followed the singular proceedings of M. Caron de Beaumarchais during his
pretended Negotiations in London with the pretended Chevalier D’Eon de
Beaumont.’—_Mém. de la Chevalière D’Eon_, ii. 179. _Archives des affaires
étrangères._ Gaill. 218.

[287] Madame Dubarry became the favourite of Louis XV. in 1769, five
years after the death of de Pompadour. According to Boutaric the title of
the pamphlet was: _Secret Memoirs of a Courtesan_.

[288] The King’s head valet enjoyed the privilege of being in constant
communication with the sovereign, frequently playing the part of a spy at
Court. The coveted office was held in the preceding reign by the Marquis
de Termes, who was in great favour with Louis XIV.

[289] Morande gave up six thousand impressions of this pamphlet, the
whole of which, with one exception, were destroyed in a glass-house at
_Marybone_. The one copy preserved was cut into two parts, one part being
kept by Beaumarchais, the other by Morande, for the purpose of verifying
other editions should the issue of them be attempted. Had any appeared,
Morande would have forfeited his pension.

[290] _Beaumarchais et son temps_, i. 416.

[291] June 21, 1775. Loménie, i. 419.

[292] _Archives des affaires étrangères._ Gaill. 214.

[293] Morande.

[294] Beaumarchais to the Count de Vergennes, July 14, 1775. Gaill. 231.

[295] August 26, 1775. Loménie, i. 421.

[296] Beaumarchais to the Count de Vergennes, October 7, 1775. Loménie,
i. 422.

[297] Note by D’Eon, written in 1776(?).

[298] ‘Dictated by M. de Beaumarchais, then corrected by him and the
Chevalier D’Eon.’—Note by D’Eon.

[299] ‘Father and uncle.’

[300] ‘Seeing that his/her (_son sexe_) sex has been proved by witnesses,
physicians, surgeons, matrons and legal documents.’—Inserted in the
margin by D’Eon and cancelled by Beaumarchais.

[301] Tardy admission of the justice of D’Eon’s claims against the State,
vainly urged during many years.

[302] ‘That I have already worn upon several occasions known to his
Majesty.’—Inserted by D’Eon and cancelled by Beaumarchais.

[303] See p. 185.

[304] ‘This Covenant was not actually signed until November 4, after the
return of Beaumarchais, who had brought from Paris the instruments of his
authority. But M. D’Eon having been born on October 5, 1728, and as the
said Covenant endowed him with an existence conformable to his sex, M. de
Beaumarchais wished to pay Mademoiselle D’Eon the compliment of dating
this document, which was to her a sort of new baptismal certificate, with
the same date as that of her birth.’—Note by D’Eon.

[305] Gaill. 399.

[306] From a leaflet printed in English and French for circulation by
D’Eon, who added: ‘N.B.—This judgment given by the King himself serves
to authenticate the justice of Chevalier D’Eon’s cause, and ought not to
leave him a single enemy under the reign of Louis XVI., when the choice
of ministers seems to characterise the monarch’s virtues, and to proclaim
that the brave and virtuous citizen is assured of a protector.’

[307] One English and ten French ladies are decorated with the cross of
the Legion of Honour at the present time.

[308] Gaill. 402.

[309] _Morning Post and Daily Advertiser_, &c., November 10-11, 1775.

[310] _Morning Post and Daily Advertiser_, &c., November 13-14, 1775.
_The Morning Post_, established in 1772, was already having a large
circulation.

[311] Gaill. 249.

[312] The Count de Broglio remained passive. ‘He is not a genius of the
first water, but lively, and sometimes agreeable,’ said Walpole, who met
the count in Paris, to the Hon. H. S. Conway.

[313] Loménie, i. 428, 518.

[314] The Chevalier’s debt to Lord Ferrers was represented as amounting
to 5,333_l._ minus interest, &c. Beaumarchais paid the earl about
5,000_l._, and gave a bill for the balance, which, however, he failed to
meet. D’Eon stated his liabilities to be 13,933_l._

[315] It is certain that D’Eon did not deliver every paper of importance.
Having dined with M. Hirsinger, French Chargé d’Affaires, on February 1,
1792, she consigned to that minister ‘a _valise_ containing papers of the
Court and King.’—_Journal for 1792._ D’Eon MSS. B.M.

[316] Gaill. 414.

[317] Loménie, i. 432.

[318] Madame de Courcelles to D’Eon, January 1, 1776. Gaill. 396.

[319] February 3, 1776. B.M. MSS.

[320] _Déclaration qui prouve que les Sieurs Morande et de Beaumarchais
voulaient absolument, et malgré le Chevalier D’Eon, s’établir une fortune
par les polices sur son sexe._ B.M. MSS. ii. 341.

[321] This, and subsequent correspondence between Beaumarchais, D’Eon,
and the Count de Vergennes was published under the title:—_Pièces
relatives aux démêlés entre Mademoiselle d’Eon de Beaumont, Chevalière de
l’Ordre Royal et Militaire de Saint-Louis, et Ministre Plénipotentiaire
de France, &c., et le Sieur Caron dit de Beaumarchais, &c._, 1778 (12mo).
B.M. MSS. ii. 341, and reproduced in de la Fortelle’s latest edition
(1779) of _La Vie Militaire, Politique, et Privée de Mademoiselle, &c.,
D’Eon de Beaumont, &c._

[322] _The Westminster Gazette_, August 6-10, 1776.

[323] Gaill. 196.

[324] _Public Ledger_, August 24, 1776.

[325] Beaumarchais to D’Eon, August 18, 1776. Loménie, i. 518.

[326] _Archives des affaires étrangères._ Gaill. 292.

[327] Le Gueux would have been a more suitable name, as the sequel will
show.

[328] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. xliv.

[329] _Scots Magazine_, vol. xxxix.

[330] Campan, i. 190.

[331] Ch. MSS.

[332] _Archives des affaires étrangères._ Gaill. 296.

[333] Preamble to Will. Ch. MSS.

[334] This was the prelate who supported the curé of Saint-Sulpice in his
refusal to inter the remains of Voltaire.

[335] Marie Louise, daughter of Louis XV., was received into the Convent
of St. Denis.

[336] Ch. MSS. 954, 1,154.

[337] Daughters of M. Genest, at whose house the Chevalière was residing.

[338] I will quote from one among the several sensational descriptions
of D’Eon’s personal appearance, scarcely thinking it necessary to remind
the reader that she was not a colonel, nor had she been at Fontenoy. ‘...
He was at the period referred to about forty-seven years of age, tall
and muscular, swarthy, sunburnt, weather-beaten, scarred, having been
wounded in several engagements, since, as a youth of fifteen, he began
his career at Fontenoy.... For many years this bold colonel of dragoons
has been known as the Chevalier Eon de Beaumont.... From under the shade
of his thick shaggy eyebrows gleam a pair of bright bold-looking eyes
... in his triple row of ruffles, _mantelet à la reine_, and _bonnet à
la baigneuse_ surmounting a row of grizzly curls, he looks a very odd
figure of fun.’—_French Court and Society, Reign of Louis XVI. and First
Empire_, by Catherine Charlotte, Lady Jackson. 1881.

[339] Gudin, quoted by Loménie, i. 417, says it was ‘une voix de femme.’

[340] _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. xlviii. _Scots Magazine_, vol. xl.

[341] In allusion to Beaumarchais’ early apprenticeship.

[342] _Pièces Relatives_, &c. 243.

[343] _An Epistle from Mademoiselle D’Eon to the Right Hon. L——d M——d,
C——f J——e of the C——t of K——g’s B——h, on his determination in regard to
her sex._ London, 1778.

[344] See Appendix.

[345] March 17, 1777.

[346] Ch. MSS.

[347] Ch. MSS. 719. _European Magazine_, 1791.

[348] Bibliothèque de Tonnerre. Gaill. 310-316.

[349] Bibliothèque de Tonnerre. Gaill. 307.

[350] Ch. MSS.

[351] A drawn battle was fought between Keppel and d’Orvilliers off
Ushant, in July 1778, previous to which the French admiral in command
of the combined squadrons of France and Spain, consisting of sixty-five
ships of the line, besides frigates, &c., had ridden master of the
Channel for a considerable time.

[352] This unpublished letter, dated Rue de Noailles, Versailles,
February 8, 1779, in the Egerton Collection at the B.M., appears to be
the original. At the top of the first page is written in another hand:
‘Parler à M. le Comte de Vergennes.’ How did it get into the Egerton
Collection?

[353] Ch. MSS. _Courier de l’Europe_, November 9, 1784.

[354] Of Kavenmally, near Newport, Monmouthshire. Lord Mount Edgecumbe
humorously observed one day, that ‘D’Eon was her own widow!’

[355] Robineau, a French artist, executed a painting on this subject,
from which a print was published.

[356] Ch. MSS. Old newspapers.

[357] D’Eon played Mr. Phillidor at another great match on April 13,
1793. Phillidor, a composer of music, was one of the greatest chess
players who ever lived, and founder of a school which has proved itself
second to none. He died almost literally in a garret. He was the author
of a _Treatise on Chess_, 1749.

[358] This sale was held on May 24, 1793.

[359] To the Public. An Historical Account of the Facts, Motives, and
Reasons which lay Mademoiselle la Chevalière D’Eon under the necessity of
making, in her lifetime, a public sale of all she possesses in London,
_in order to satisfy and pay her creditors, before her departure_ for
Paris.—_Justitiæ Soror Fides!_

[360] Earl Ferrers had rebuilt the mansion of Staunton Harold according
to a plan of his own, and lived to see it nearly finished.

[361] This lady was put upon her trial for bigamy.

[362] His lordship’s superintendent.

[363] His lordship’s secretary, residing at Loughborough.

[364] See p. 262.

[365] _Morning Post_, April 23-27, 1787.

[366] Ch. MSS.

[367] ‘I am a great friend to these public amusements, sir,’ said Dr.
Johnson, (who often went to Ranelagh, which he deemed a place of innocent
recreation) to Boswell; ‘they keep people from vice.’ And a few years
later we read of Walpole’s four nieces being at Ranelagh the night of the
Gordon riots, together with the Duke of Gloucester.

[368] Catalogue of sale.

[369] By a strange contradiction, D’Eon purchased later in the year, at
Christie’s rooms, the Mead and Douglas collections of Horace in 8vo, 4to,
and folio; for which she paid 100_l._, having herself assisted in the
preparation of the catalogue.

[370] _Scots Magazine_, vol. liv. _Gentleman’s Magazine_, vol. lxii.

[371] M. Beauvais, _père_, Jermyn Street, January 12, 1793. Ch. MSS.

[372] Beaten at Nerwinde, on March 18. It was said of this general under
the Republic: ‘Qu’il cherchait à sauver sa tête en négociant au dehors
avec le Général Cobourg, et dedans avec la faction d’Orléans.’

[373] See Note, p. 264.

[374] Old newspapers.

[375] John Taylor freely expresses it as his opinion that D’Eon disgraced
_his_ character by exhibiting _himself_ with Mrs. Bateman in fencing
matches at several provincial towns. In March 1794, D’Eon wrote to ask
Warren Hastings, with whom he was well acquainted, for a letter of
introduction to Mr. Peter Speke, of the Supreme Council at Calcutta,
in behalf of the Batemans, who were proceeding to India to claim some
property. After Mr. Bateman’s death, his widow was married to Mr. Ester,
and died at Calcutta in 1801.

[376] B.M. MSS.

[377] D’Eon Papers. B.M.

[378] Mrs. Cole, a native of Lorraine, born in the same year as D’Eon,
was the widow of Mr. W. Cole, pump maker to the Royal Navy, and an
ingenious inventor. She had long been on intimate terms of friendship
with Mrs. Robinson, of Denston Hall, Suffolk, the daughter of Lord Clive.

[379] D’Eon had sold to Major Clive, in 1794, Marshal Saxe’s sword, a
huge sabre and a large carbine, for which she received sixty pounds.

[380] B.M. MSS.

[381] Ch. MSS.

[382] _The Times_, May 25, 1810.

[383] See Cansick’s interesting and painstaking work, _A Collection of
curious and interesting Epitaphs ... in the Ancient Church and Burial
Grounds of St. Pancras_. London, 1869. ‘It is lamentable,’ says the
author, ‘to see the dilapidated state of the monuments in this ground,
belonging to wealthy and well-known families, which for a few pounds
might be restored and made a credit to the churchyard.’

[384] The Baroness Burdett-Coutts who is here, there, and everywhere in
the practice of benevolence, not unmindful of the desecration to which
the remains of the illustrious dead had been subjected, caused to be
erected at considerable expense, in St. Pancras churchyard, a monument
which bears the names of those whose ashes lie scattered about the parish
playground.

[385] In the possession of Mr. Christie.

[386] Ch. MSS.

[387] _Histoire de France pendant le dix-huitième siècle._ Paris, 1819.

[388] Mr. Thomas William Plummer, intimately acquainted with the
Chevalier, had undertaken, in 1804, to translate the ample material
placed at his disposal, and produce a biography. From some unexplained
cause this was never done.

[389] _History and Topography of the Parish of St. Pancras._ London,
1729-1830.

[390] Ch. MSS.

[391] _Ibid._

[392] See p. 213. D’Eon to the Count de Broglio, February 10, 1775.
Broglie, ii. 563, also pp. 218, 235.

[393] Vandal, 264.

[394] Frequent errors have been made in the Chevalier’s age. The date of
birth on his coffin-plate was October 17, 1727; and the Duke de Broglie
imputes to him forty-three years, _bien sonnés_, in 1775.

[395] Angelica Kauffmann was for a long time a neighbour of the
Chevalier, her residence being in Golden Square.

[396] This is an error. Bradel was born in 1750.




INDEX.


  Abel, Ch. Fred., musician, 288

  Adair, Mr., 331

  Addington, Mr., 214

  Aiguillon, Duke d’, Minister for Foreign Affairs, hostility to D’Eon,
        219, 224

  Angelo, Mr., at Carlton House, 308;
    friendship for D’Eon, 310;
    lines on D’Eon, 346

  Angelo, Henry, at Carlton House, 308;
    on D’Eon’s fencing, 310

  Apraxin, Marshal the Count, at Gross Jägersdorff, 22;
    retreat, 22, 36;
    character, 22 _note_

  Arden, R. N., Captain, 324

  Argental, Count d’, designs on D’Eon’s life, 164-166, 194;
    letter from Voltaire, 300

  Aubaret, Marquis d’, 225

  Augusta, H.R.H. the Princess (Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel), 119, 198


  Bach, Jean Christ., composer, surnamed _l’Anglais_, 288

  Bateman, Mrs., actress and fencer, _déjeuner_ at Soho Square, 325;
    her professional tour, 325-326

  Bathe, Colonel du, 324

  Beaumarchais, P. A. Caron de, 230;
    share in the Dubarry scandal, 231-235;
    impression made by D’Eon, 235, 278;
    instructions from de Vergennes to mediate with D’Eon, 236;
    first success, 238;
    recovers secret papers, 241;
    Earl Ferrers, 242;
    covenant with D’Eon, 243-251;
    payment to Earl Ferrers on account of D’Eon, 251;
    instructions from Louis XVI., 251;
    delivers secret papers to de Vergennes, 259;
    Louis XVI.’s final instructions regarding D’Eon, 260-261;
    breach with D’Eon, 261;
    and subsequent correspondence, 262-273;
    his vanity, 273;
    reported marriage with D’Eon, 273-274;
    interest in the D’Eon sex policies, 274-276;
    insulting proposal to D’Eon, 275;
    reprehensible conduct, 278;
    final correspondence with D’Eon, 281, 295

  Bedford, Duke of, Ambassador at Versailles, signatory of the Treaty
        of Peace, 63 _note_;
    mistaken opinion of de Guerchy, 66;
    report on de Choiseul, 76 _note_;
    consulted by de Guerchy, 147;
    popular feeling against him, 152

  Belle-Isle, Marshal de, Minister for War, 4;
    reception of D’Eon, 26

  Bernis, Abbé, afterwards Cardinal de, Minister for Foreign Affairs, 4;
    reception of D’Eon, 26;
    despatches him to Russia, 29-30;
    approves his refusal to serve Russia, 33

  Bertin, Mademoiselle, furnishes Mademoiselle D’Eon’s outfit, 290;
    and clothes her in female attire, 292

  Bestoujeff-Riumin, Count, grand chancellor, hostility to France, 15,
        16;
    to Prussia, 15;
    devotion to Peter and Catherine, 16;
    ignorance of Vice-Chancellor’s secret action, 19;
    in secret correspondence with Prussia, 29;
    estimate of D’Eon, 30;
    is arrested, his treatment and exile, 32-33;
    designs on Douglas and D’Eon, 32;
    treasonable conduct explained, 32

  Blackstone, Dr. (later, Lord Chief Justice), 201

  Blosset, Marquis de, in diplomatic charge, complaint to Lord Halifax
        against D’Eon, 162

  Boufflers, Countess de, at Strawberry Hill breakfast, 83;
    entertained by D’Eon, 96

  Breteuil, Baron de, minister plenipotentiary to Russia, 42;
    secret instructions from Louis XV., 43;
    unequal to the circumstances, 54;
    removed to Stockholm, 55;
    on special mission to England, 207

  Broglio, Marshal the Duke de, receives D’Eon as aide-de-camp, 48;
    fastidious in the selection of his staff, 48;
    at the battle of Villinghausen, 51, 70;
    is exiled, 52;
    testimonial to D’Eon, 53;
    his occasional correspondent, 71;
    D’Eon’s admiration for him, 71

  Broglio, Count de, French Minister to Poland, 25;
    serves in the campaign of 1761, 48-52;
    exiled, 53;
    letters of remonstrance to Louis XV., 53;
    recommends D’Eon as minister plenipotentiary to Russia, 54;
    D’Eon’s esteem for him, 72;
    scheme for the invasion of England, 74;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    anxiety for the safety of the King’s papers, 76, 77, 84, 126, 133,
        143, 179 _note_;
    sympathy for D’Eon, 133;
    recalled from exile, 143;
    conciliatory letters to D’Eon, 148, 183, 185;
    remonstrance from D’Eon, 153;
    ministers’ designs against him, 166;
    conducts, by order, a farce at the Bastille, 176;
    expostulates with Hume, 179;
    threatens to disclose the secret correspondence, 189;
    on the restoration of the Stuarts, 199;
    informs Louis XV. that D’Eon is a female, 218;
    in exile, 219;
    communicates history of secret correspondence to Louis XVI., 221;
    and D’Eon’s share in it, 222;
    and that he is a female, 223;
    recalled from exile, 224;
    treats with D’Eon for the King’s papers, 227;
    the Dubarry scandal, 231;
    D’Eon’s confession to being a female, 257;
    last letter from D’Eon, 300

  Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, Duke of, 198

  Burdett-Coutts, the Baroness, 333 _note_

  Bute, Earl of, First Lord of the Treasury, 58;
    interest in D’Eon, 66, 68;
    unpopularity, 152;
    consulted by D’Eon, 160;
    George III.’s displeasure, 196;
    attachment to the Stuarts, 198;
    character by D’Eon, 198;
    de Broglio’s desire to know his secret intentions, 199


  Camus, C. E. Louis, academician, 96

  Catherine of Anhalt-Zerbst, grand-duchess, friendly towards England
        and intercourse with Sir Hanbury Williams, 16, 57;
    what Elizabeth said of her, 16;
    refused permission to proceed to Germany, 32;
    accession as Catherine II., 55;
    portrait by D’Eon, 56;
    pretended ignorance of D’Eon, 57;
    his acquaintance with her, 58

  Charles, Prince (Duke of Courland), 31

  Charlotte, H.M. Queen, 197, 331

  Châtelet, Count de, ambassador in London, reports to Louis XV. that
        D’Eon is a female, 209

  Chesterfield, Earl of, on the true bill against the French
        ambassador, 180;
    his error, 181

  Chétardie, Marquis de la, ambassador to Russia in 1744, 5, 15

  Choiseul, Duke de, Minister for Foreign Affairs, then Minister for
        War, ignorance of Louis XV.’s secret policy, 37;
    hostility to England, 37, 38 _note_;
    change of policy, 38;
    instructions to de l’Hôpital, and censure for neglect, 38, 39;
    peace policy secretly opposed by D’Eon, 40;
    requires de l’Hôpital’s recall, 42;
    recommends D’Eon as minister to Russia, 54;
    expulsion of Jesuits, 60 _note_;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    Duke of Bedford’s report, 76 _note_;
    offers D’Eon’s restoration to the army, 137;
    lines on his exile, 137 _note_;
    complains of no justice in England, 173

  Choiseul, Count de, attention to D’Eon at Vienna, 48.
    _See_ Duke de Praslin

  Christie, Mr., friendship for D’Eon, 323, 324;
    acquisition of the Chevalier’s MSS., 335

  Church, Mrs., 308

  Clive, M. P., Major, 330 and _note_

  Cole, Mrs., companion to Mademoiselle D’Eon, 328-331;
    astonishment at the Chevalière’s sex, 331

  Condamine, La. _See_ La Condamine

  Constable, Lady, 324

  Conti, Prince de (grand-nephew of the great Condé), recommends D’Eon
        for secret service, 6;
    secret correspondence with Russia, 11;
    conditionally promised the command of Russian army and principality
        of Courland, 24, 26;
    ambitious designs, 24;
    rupture with de Pompadour, 26

  Conti, Prince de, son of the above, 332

  Copeland, T., surgeon, attestation on D’Eon’s sex, 332

  Cosway, R. A., 310

  Cotes, Humphrey, of Byfleet, 183;
    takes charge of secret correspondence, 186

  Courcelles, Constance de, 273, 341

  Cramer, Ch. Frederick, man of letters, 288

  Crawford, Mrs., 331

  Crosby, Lord Mayor, D’Eon sworn before him, 215


  Dashkoff, Princess, intimately known to D’Eon, 58;
    who she intimates is a female, 209, 216

  Daun, Marshal, defeats Frederick, 22

  Dent, Mr., banker, 324

  Déon de Beaumont, Françoise, mother of the Chevalier, 2;
    consecrates her child to the Virgin Mary, 3;
    letter from de l’Hôpital, 46;
    involved in her child’s misfortunes, 133;
    letter from the Chevalier, 134-136;
    de Guerchy’s persecution, 191

  Déon de Beaumont, Louis, father of the Chevalier, 2;
    requires the child to adopt male attire, 3;
    death, 4

  Déon. _See_ Eon

  Dodwell, the Misses, 331

  Douglas, _alias_ Mackenzie, the Chevalier, who was he? 6;
    instructions as secret envoy to Russia, 6-11;
    not obtaining presentation at Russian Court, returns to France,
        12-13;
    complains of English ambassador’s treatment, 13;
    second journey to Russia, 18;
    interview with vice-chancellor and presentation at Court, 18;
    delight at D’Eon’s return to Russia, 19;
    accredited chargé d’affaires, 21;
    success in Russia, 24;
    recalled, to please the grand chancellor, 30;
    Bestoujeff’s designs against him, 32

  Douglas, Mr., 331

  Drouet, M., private secretary to Count de Broglio, sent to the
        Bastille, 175;
    threatens disclosures and is liberated, 177;
    report on D’Eon’s sex, 218

  Dubarry, Madame, a publication on her life stopped, by Louis XV.,
        231-234

  Duclos, Ch. Pireau, academician, 96

  Durand, M., secret agent, to assist in survey of England, 75;
    nickname in correspondence, 76;
    minister plenipotentiary in London, 185;
    recovers from D’Eon, King’s secret instructions, 187

  Duval, Mr. John, the king’s jeweller, 313, 315-316


  Egremont, Earl of, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
        unpopularity, 152

  Elisée, Père, physician, attends D’Eon, 331-332;
    acquisition of the Chevalier’s MSS., 335

  Elizabeth, Empress of Russia, friendly towards France, 5, 14;
    delay in ratifying Treaty with Great Britain, 13;
    admirer of English fashions, 14 _note_;
    what she said of Catherine, 16;
    writes privately to Louis XV., 17;
    invites D’Eon to enter her service, 17, 33;
    and return to Russia, 47;
    renews relation with France, 20, 21;
    disregards Treaty with England and joins French-Austrian Alliance,
        21, 37;
    indignation at Frederick, 21;
    Apraxin’s recall, 23;
    gift to Voltaire, 23;
    to D’Eon, 23, 47;
    invited to correspond with Louis XV., 29;
    Bestoujeff’s arrest and exile, 32;
    death, 54

  Eon de Beaumont, C.G.L.A.A.T. d’, parentage and early years, 1-2;
    dedicated to the Virgin Mary, 3;
    education and abilities, 3-5;
    an accomplished fencer, 5;
    secret envoy, with Douglas, to Russia, 6;
    secret correspondent to Louis XV., 11;
    received by the Empress, 13;
    personal appearance and anecdote, 14;
    dislike to Russia, 14, 34, 41;
    triumph of French party, 17;
    invited to enter the service of Russia, 17;
    returns to Versailles, 17;
    second journey to Russia, 19;
    secretary of legation, 21;
    and to conduct the secret correspondence, 21;
    second return to Versailles with State papers, 23;
    importance of services in Russia, 23, 45-47, 267;
    presents from the Empress, 23, 47;
    success in Russia, 24;
    trait of character, 24;
    message to Prince de Conti, 24, 26;
    reaches Paris with a broken leg, 25;
    honours and rewards, 26, 35, 48, 54 _note_, 66, 185;
    appointed lieutenant of dragoons, 26;
    _mémoire_ on Russia, 27;
    applies to join his regiment, 28, 42;
    Bestoujeff’s treachery, 29;
    third journey to Russia, 29;
    repartee on Admiral Byng’s execution, 31;
    Poniatovsky’s bribe, 31;
    favourite at Russian Court, 31;
    Bestoujeff’s designs, 32;
    again invited to serve Russia, and reasons for refusing, 33, 34;
    promoted to captain, 35;
    share in the war, 39-40;
    opposes the policy of ministers, 40;
    his advice to the ambassador approved by Louis XV., 40;
    failing health, 41, 45;
    secret orders from Louis XV., 44;
    who approves his services, 44;
    de l’Hôpital’s high opinion of D’Eon, 45-46;
    reception by Louis XV., 48;
    aide-de-camp to Marshal and Count de Broglio, 48;
    dashing services during the campaign of 1761, 49-53;
    selected as minister plenipotentiary to Russia, 54;
    portrait of Catherine II., 56;
    of Lord Sandwich, 59;
    of the Duke de Nivernois, 60, 98;
    secretary of embassy in London, 60;
    smart pieces of work, 61-63;
    abilities appreciated, 63, 65;
    takes Treaty of Peace to Paris, 64;
    Lord Bute’s favour, 66, 68;
    created a Knight of Saint Louis, 66, 72;
    suspected of attachment to the de Broglios, 69;
    de Soubise and de Broglio at Villinghausen, 70;
    esteem for the de Broglios, 71;
    brings presents to Count Viri, 72;
    chargé d’affaires in London, 73;
    secret correspondent to Louis XV., and employed on survey of
        England, 74;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    cautioned on safety of the King’s papers, 76, 84;
    Louis XV.’s secret orders, 77;
    fate determined by de Pompadour, 78;
    and why? 85;
    minister plenipotentiary, 82;
    indifference to advancement, 83;
    a favourite in England, 83;
    debt incurred on the King’s service, 85;
    embarrassed circumstances, 86;
    protected by a Letter of State, 87;
    appeals for repayment, 86, 88;
    impudent letter to de Praslin, 92;
    to de Guerchy, 94;
    mistaken ministers, 97;
    portrait of Lord Hertford, 102;
    superseded and recalled, 103-107;
    Louis XV.’s order to resume female attire, 104;
    reported insanity, 105, 119, 130;
    Lord Halifax, 109;
    refusal to surrender the King’s papers, 110, 136;
    scene at Lord Halifax’s dinner-party, 111, 115;
    frightens a duellist, and is summoned by a magistrate, 117-118;
    letter to Louis XV. on de Guerchy, 119-121;
    is drugged, 121;
    warned by Louis XV. of demand for his extradition, 125;
    which is not acceded to, 127;
    in peril of being kidnapped, 128, 149, 159-161, 214, 279;
    mines his apartments and measures of defence, 128, 129 _note_, 146,
        148, 159, 243;
    scares away an attaché, 129;
    forbidden the Court, 132;
    letter to his mother, 134;
    offered restoration to the army, 137;
    warned for his safety, 137, 160;
    publishes correspondence of ministers and ambassadors, and
        justification, 138-140, 147;
    seeks expatriation, 143, 217;
    threatens to disclose the King’s secret, 144-146;
    proof against bribery, 145, 152;
    patriotism, 152, 216, 237-238;
    tried for libel, 154;
    chastises a scurrilous scribe, 155;
    letters to Lord Mansfield, Lord Bute, Mr. Pitt, Lord Temple,
        160-161;
    found guilty of libel, in default, searched, and outlawed, 161-163;
    conspiracy against his life, 163-168;
    challenges de Guerchy, 170;
    note of intimidation to de Broglio, 179;
    to Louis XV. on de Guerchy, 180;
    admiration for Louis XV., 184, 221;
    a pension conferred by the King, 185;
    surrenders the King’s secret orders, 187;
    reported disguise as a female, 189;
    second challenge to de Guerchy, 191;
    the first of political reporters, 194;
    Mr. Pitt, 195-197;
    slandered and public protests, 199-200;
    conduct in Musgrave affair, 202, 225;
    letter to Dr. Musgrave, 203-205;
    sympathy for Wilkes, 206;
    at rest! 207;
    popularity, 209;
    doubts raised as to sex, 209;
    captivating manners, 209;
    policies of insurance on sex, 210-216;
    allusions to physical failings, 213, 219, 342;
    protests, 215, 257, 288;
    Poniatovsky’s offers of succour, 217;
    saves England from war, 218;
    Drouet’s report on D’Eon’s sex, 218;
    personal appearance, 219;
    his case laid before Louis XVI., 222-226;
    to continue secret correspondence, 226;
    refuses terms for surrender of the King’s papers, 227-230;
    offer of marriage, 230;
    the Dubarry scandal, 231-235;
    impression on Beaumarchais, 235, 278;
    surrenders the King’s papers, 241;
    covenant with Beaumarchais, 243-251;
    Louis XVI.’s permission to return to France, 252;
    and orders to resume female attire, 254;
    fresh policies on sex and new protests, 256-257;
    confesses to being a female, 257;
    breach with Beaumarchais, 261;
    aversion to resuming female attire, 263-271, 280, 289, 290, 292,
        300, 305, 306;
    consignment of State papers to the French minister, 264 _note_;
    reported marriage to Beaumarchais, 273;
    challenges a foul libeller, 279;
    personal liberty in danger, 279;
    public feeling, 280;
    de Vergennes’ conditional protection in France, 283;
    trial on sex policies and proved to be a female, 283-287;
    appears in public as a female, and leaves for Paris in uniform,
        287-289;
    renewed protest against sex policies, 288;
    Louis XVI.’s order to resume female attire, 289;
    Marie Antoinette supplies her outfit, 290;
    reception at Tonnerre, 291;
    dressed by Mademoiselle Bertin and presented at Court, 292;
    deportment as a lady, 293-295;
    personated at social gatherings, 295;
    the last of Beaumarchais, 295-297;
    addresses her contemporaries, 297, 298;
    other trials on sex policies, and decision of Lord Mansfield,
        297-298;
    epistle to Lord Mansfield, 299;
    grotesque and other portraits, 299, and Appendix;
    on the War of Independence, 301;
    anxiety to return to England, 301, 305;
    at various ladies’ retreats, 302-304;
    volunteers for service afloat, 305;
    the Maid of Tonnerre! 306;
    resumes her uniform and is arrested, 306;
    released and goes home, 307;
    a royal guest, 307;
    quits France and arrives in London, 308;
    fences at Carlton House, 308-309;
    plays Phillidor at chess, 310;
    on George III.’s illness, 311;
    advertised sale of library, 311, 312;
    transactions with the House of Ferrers, 311-319;
    public sympathy, 320;
    sale of jewellery, 320-321;
    preparations for France, 320, 322;
    offers to serve the Republic, 322;
    ordered to join General Dumouriez, 323;
    deprived of every source of maintenance, 324;
    English friends, 324;
    exhibits in public as a fencer, 325-327;
    dangerously wounded, 327;
    hard times, 328-331;
    obtains a passport to France, 329;
    last days, death and burial, 331-333;
    autopsy of the body, 333-334;
    will, and directions for burial, 334-335;
    administration of effects, 335;
    sale of five hundred editions of Horace, 335;
    character, 335-337;
    habits and occupations, 337-338;
    a free-mason, 337;
    sentiments on religion, 338-340;
    coldness of temperament, 340-342;
    reflections, 342-344;
    fugitive pieces, 344, 346;
    publications, 361

  Eon de l’Estoile, 1

  Eon de Mouloise, Chevalier d’, 77, 84, 156 _note_.
    _See_ Déon


  Fabien, a noted fencer, 308

  Fermor, Field-Marshal, beaten by Frederick, 36

  Ferrers, Washington, 5th Earl, 214;
    entrusted by D’Eon with the King’s papers, 238;
    his interest (?) in their custody, 242;
    receives 5,000_l._ on account of D’Eon’s creditors, 251, 262, 311;
    what he did with the money, 311-316;
    death, 316

  Ferrers, Robert, 6th Earl, sued by D’Eon and result, 316;
    death, 317

  Ferrers, Robert, 7th Earl, his faithlessness, 317

  Ffloyd, Sir William, 324

  Fielding, Sir John, D’Eon summoned before him, 118;
    receives his declaration, 129 _note_;
    and de Vergy’s depositions, 193;
    entertained by D’Eon, 214

  Fitzherbert, Mr., M.P., 201, 204

  Fitzherbert, Mrs., 326

  Frederick the Great, his sarcasms, 21;
    secret correspondence with the grand-duke, 29


  Genest, Mr., chief clerk at Ministry for Foreign Affairs, receives
        D’Eon in his house, 289;
    Marie Antoinette and D’Eon, 289

  Geneviève, la Citoyenne. _See_ D’Eon de Beaumont

  George III., His Majesty, entrusts Treaty of Peace to D’Eon, 64;
    inquiry respecting de Guerchy, 102;
    displeased with Lord Bute, 196-198;
    his debts and economy, 197

  Glencairn, Lord and Lady, 324

  Gloucester, Duke of, 198, 320 _note_, 326

  Goddard, a noted fencer, 308

  Gorman. _See_ O’Gorman

  Grafton, Duchess of, 60

  Grenville, George, First Lord of the Treasury, actor in the scene at
        Lord Halifax’s, 111, 115-116

  Grey, William de, solicitor-general, 181

  Grimaldi, Marquis, signatory to the Treaty of Peace, 63 _note_

  Guerchy, Count de, lieutenant-general, conduct in action, 49;
    ambassador to Great Britain, and the Duke of Bedford’s report on
        him, 66;
    character, 67;
    de Praslin’s estimate of him, 67;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    insulting letter to D’Eon, 94;
    what de Broglio and de Nivernois thought of him, 68, 76, 99;
    arrival in London and deportment towards D’Eon, 102;
    delivers D’Eon’s letters of recall and urgent for his departure,
        103, 109, 110;
    conduct at Lord Halifax’s dinner-party, 111, 115-116;
    scene at his residence, 113;
    publishes pamphlets defamatory of D’Eon, 119, 136, 138;
    efforts to kidnap D’Eon, 128, 149, 160;
    complaint to Louis XV., 130;
    prosecutes D’Eon for libel, 154;
    in collision with English authorities, 156-157;
    design on D’Eon’s life, 164-168, 194;
    groundless charge against de Vergy, 169, 173;
    declines to fight D’Eon, 170;
    prosecuted for inciting to murder, 171;
    true bill found, 178;
    Attorney-General refuses to certify in his favour, 181;
    is mobbed, 182;
    reception upon his return from leave, 183;
    superseded, 187;
    persecutes Madame D’Eon, 191;
    his death, 191;
    D’Eon’s second challenge, 191;
    anecdote of his father, 191 _note_

  Guerchy, Countess de, her disposition, 121 _note_

  Guines, Count de, ambassador in London, instructed to communicate
        with D’Eon, 237


  Halifax, Earl of, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, receives
        D’Eon at an interview, 109;
    invites him to take leave of the King, 111;
    scene at his residence, and the Guards summoned, 111, 115-116;
    refuses to surrender D’Eon to France, 127;
    unpopularity, 152;
    Dr. Musgrave’s story, 201-202

  Hammersley, Mr., banker, 320

  Hastings, Warren, 326 _note_

  Henry of Prussia, Prince, visits D’Eon at Tonnerre, 307

  Hertford, Earl of, at the French Embassy, 96;
    portrait by D’Eon, 102;
    ambassador to France, 102

  Hirsinger, M., French Chargé d’Affaires, receives from D’Eon a packet
        of State Papers, 265 _note_;
    hospitality to her, 324

  Hone, _old_, 310

  Hôpital, Marquis de l’, Ambassador Extraordinary to Russia, 24;
    applies for D’Eon as Secretary of Embassy, 29-30;
    receives the Ministry’s instructions, consults D’Eon, neglects them
        and is censured, 38-39;
    the King’s approval, 40;
    high estimate of D’Eon, 45-46;
    letter to D’Eon on the Empress Catherine and Princess Dashkoff, 58

  Hume, David, at the French Embassy, 96;
    secretary of Embassy at Versailles, 178;
    conversation with de Broglio respecting D’Eon, 179


  Jumilhac, M., governor of the Bastille, required by Louis XV. to
        violate his trust, 176


  Kaunitz, Prince, Austrian Minister, sends news of the battle of
        Prague to Count Staremberg, 25;
    copy of his instructions to Count Esterhazy, supplied to D’Eon, 29

  Kelly, Sir George, 325

  Kemys-Tynte, Colonel, hospitality to D’Eon, 308, 324, 331

  Kynaston, Mr., Justice of the Peace, sends a summons to D’Eon, 118


  La Condamine, Ch. Marie de, the traveller, 96

  Lalande, J. J. le Français de, the astronomer, 96

  Lauraguais, Count de, 232-234

  Lestocq, Count, a favourite of Elizabeth, tortured and exiled, 15

  Lewald, Field-Marshal, beaten at Gross Jägersdorff, 22

  Lincoln, Earl of, 183

  Lockhart, Mr., banker, 324

  Louis XV., friendly advances to Russia, 5, 18;
    secret intercourse with Elizabeth, 11, 21, 23;
    desire to correspond with the Empress, 30;
    treaty with Maria Theresa, 37;
    secret diplomacy, 40;
    approves D’Eon’s advice to the ambassador, 40;
    secret instructions to de Breteuil, 43;
    to D’Eon, 44;
    declines correspondence with Catherine, 55;
    reception of D’Eon, 66;
    orders for the survey of England, and his own precautions, 74-75;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    secret orders to D’Eon, 77;
    outwitted by de Pompadour, 78-81;
    grants Letter of State to D’Eon, 87;
    orders him to resume female attire, 104;
    D’Eon’s letters of recall, 106;
    does not believe in his insanity, 123;
    admits de Guerchy to the secret correspondence, 124;
    letter of warning to D’Eon, 125;
    anxiety for his papers in England, 132, 149, 151;
    confidence in D’Eon, 146;
    his pusillanimity, 151;
    uneasiness at Guerchy’s situation, 174;
    humiliating position, 175-177;
    confers a pension on D’Eon, 185;
    his fickleness, 206-207;
    death and funeral, 219-220;
    D’Eon’s admiration for him, 184, 221;
    the King’s anxiety to suppress the Dubarry _mémoires_, 231

  Louis XVI., informed by de Broglio that D’Eon is a female, 223;
    abolishes the secret correspondence system, 223;
    recalls de Broglio from exile, 224;
    instructions to Beaumarchais, 251, 260-261;
    grants D’Eon permission to return to France, having resumed female
        attire, 252-255;
    renews order to D’Eon to resume female attire, 289;
    refuses her permission to proceed to England, 302

  Lyttleton, Honourable Mr., 331


  Macbean, Colonel, of the Artillery, 324

  Mansfield, Lord, Chief Justice, consulted by D’Eon, 161;
    tries him on a charge of libel, 161;
    tries the legality of sex policies, 285;
    final decision on those policies, 298

  March, Earl of, 95, 96

  Maria Theresa, treaty with Louis XV., 37

  Marie Antoinette, curiosity to see D’Eon, 289;
    orders her outfit, 290;
    the Queen’s household, 293

  Masseran, Prince, Spanish Ambassador in London, 225

  Maurepas, Count de, president of the Council, letter from D’Eon, 305

  Melville, General, 324

  Michel, M., French banker at St. Petersburg, 13;
    takes despatches to France, 18 _note_

  Mokronosky, General, a Polish patriot, in the secret correspondence,
        227 _note_

  Monin, M., employed in the secret correspondence, 12;
    betrays D’Eon, 79, 125;
    memorandum to Louis XV., on His Majesty’s secret papers, 131

  Montmorency-Bouteville, Duchess de, 307

  Motte, De la, a noted fencer, 308

  Musgrave, Dr., address to the Freeholders, &c., of Devon, 200-203


  Nardin, Colonel, secret agent, to protect D’Eon and his papers, 144,
        147

  Neville, Richard Neville, secretary of Embassy, takes Treaty of Peace
        from Paris to London, 63;
    resident, 81;
    minister plenipotentiary, 82

  Nivernois, Duke de, Ambassador Extraordinary to Great Britain, 58;
    portrait by D’Eon, 60, 98;
    personal appearance, 61;
    high opinion of D’Eon, 62, 63, 65, 68;
    invests him with the cross of Saint Louis, 72;
    receives a degree at Oxford, 73;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    offensive letter to D’Eon, 97;
    exertions in his favour, 99;
    private letters published, 138

  Nivernois, Duchess de, 70

  Nogee, a noted fencer, 308

  Nort, Chevalier, aide-de-camp to Marshal de Broglio, 70;
    secretary to Count de Broglio, hurried away to treat with D’Eon,
        148;
    Louis XV.’s instructions, 149;
    returns to Paris discomfited, 154

  Norton, Sir Fletcher, attorney-general, refusal to certify in favour
        of de Guerchy, 181

  Norton, Sir Henry, solicitor-general, against the extradition of
        D’Eon, 127;
    on the charge against de Vergy, 169


  O’Gorman, Chevalier, 135 _note_, 279

  O’Gorman, Major, 329

  O’Gorman, Captain Augustus, 329

  O’Gorman, Lewis Augustus, 335

  Ons-en-Bray, Count d’, 4, 92

  Otto, M., French minister plenipotentiary, 329


  Paine, Tom, 324

  Perigalese, Dr., 331

  Peter the Great, life by Voltaire, 23;
    will, 27-28

  Peter of Holstein Gottorp, grand-duke, indifference to Russia, 15;
    secret correspondence, 29;
    a fencer, 31;
    accession as Peter III. and alliance with Frederick, 54;
    disappearance, 54

  Phillidor, the chess player, 310-311

  Piggot, Miss, 326

  Pitt, William, consulted by D’Eon, 160;
    report on his proceedings, 195-197

  Plummer, Thomas William, attorney, administrator of D’Eon’s effects,
        335;
    his intended biographer, 336 _note_

  Poissonnier, M., physician to Elizabeth, 45

  Pommereux, Captain, sent to treat with D’Eon for the King’s papers,
        229;
    proposes marriage to Mademoiselle D’Eon, 230

  Pompadour, Marquise de, the subject of Frederick’s sarcasms, 21;
    hostility to the de Broglios, 52, 78, 85, 110;
    on D’Eon’s mission from England, 66;
    discovers the secret correspondence, 78-81;
    cause of D’Eon’s ruin, 78, 137, 229

  Poniatovsky, Prince, Polish envoy to Russia, attempt to bribe D’Eon,
        31;
    a fencer, 31;
    King of Poland offers succour to D’Eon, 217

  Praslin, Duke de, Minister for Foreign Affairs, applies to himself a
        portrait by D’Eon, 59;
    high opinion of him, 61, 62, 66;
    signatory to the Treaty of Peace, 63 _note_;
    estimate of de Guerchy, 67;
    dislike to office, 68;
    suspicions of D’Eon’s loyalty to himself, 69;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    dislike to fat people, 89 _note_;
    offensive letter to D’Eon, 91;
    recalls him, 103;
    hostility towards him, 105, 149, 150;
    reports him as insane, 105, 119;
    demands his extradition, 124;
    private letters published, 138;
    his efforts to kidnap D’Eon, 128, 149, 159;
    no justice in England! 173;
    ‘played the fool with,’ 174-177;
    remonstrance to the Duke of Richmond, 187;
    duped, 190

  Prunevaux, Marquis de, sent to treat with D’Eon for the King’s
        papers, 227;
    failure, 229


  Queensberry, Duke of, 331


  Rainsford, General, 324

  Reda, a noted fencer, 308

  Richmond, Duke of, Ambassador at Versailles, unpopularity, 152;
    urged to surrender D’Eon, 187

  Rochefort, Countess de, 341

  Rolland, a noted fencer, 308

  Rosière, Marquis de la, officer of Engineers, his reputation and
        employment in the survey of England, 74-75;
    under D’Eon’s protection, 77;
    sent to France to conceal the King’s papers, 128

  Rouillé, M., Minister for Foreign Affairs, supplies Douglas with
        private credentials, 18, 20


  Saint George, Chevalier, a distinguished fencer, Mademoiselle’s
        antagonist at Carlton House, 308-309

  Sandwich, Earl of, a secretary of State, portrait by D’Eon, 59;
    at Lord Hertford’s, 95;
    an actor in the scene at Lord Halifax’s, 111, 114-116

  Sartines, Count de, chief of police, required by Louis XV. to violate
        his trust, 175-177;
    his perplexing situation, 190

  Saxe, Marshal, his sword, 330 _note_

  Schouvaloff, Count Ivan, a favourite of Elizabeth, attachment to
        France, 16, 17

  Sheridan, Thomas, 310

  Shirley, Admiral, the Honourable Thomas, 319

  Shirley, Miss, 331

  Silk, Mr. George, attorney, report on D’Eon’s body, 332

  Slade, Mr. Robert, 329, 332

  Smith, Sir Sidney, at the autopsy of D’Eon’s body, 331;
    named as executor, 334

  Soltikoff, Prince, at Künersdorff, 36

  Soubise, Prince de, at the battle of Villinghausen, 51;
    D’Eon’s evidence thereon, 69-71

  Stanhope, Earl, president of the Revolution Society, 149 _note_

  Staremberg, Count, Austrian Ambassador at Versailles, 25


  Tamworth, Lord, hospitality to D’Eon, 308;
    supports her in her action against his father, 316.
    _See_ Robert, 5th Earl Ferrers

  Tavistock, Marquis of, friendship for D’Eon, 194

  Temple, Earl, consulted by D’Eon, 160

  Tercier, chief clerk at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and in
        charge of secret correspondence, 11, 21;
    influence over Louis XV., 43;
    letters from Louis XV., 26, 75, 132, 146, 149, 174, 175, 177;
    nickname in secret correspondence, 76;
    cautions D’Eon on his insecurity, 137, 142;
    D’Eon’s letters to him, 144-146, 147, 158;
    admitted secretly to the Bastille, 176;
    death, 210 _note_

  Thornton, Colonel, 329

  Tooke, Horne, 324

  Towneley, Mr., 325

  Townsend, Mr. C., 61

  Townshend, the Marchioness, 330

  Tryon, Mrs., 331


  Valcroissant, Chevalier de, secret envoy to Russia, imprisoned, and
        liberated through D’Eon, 5 and _note_

  Vergennes, Count de, Minister for Foreign Affairs, 224;
    necessity for humouring D’Eon, 230;
    instructions to Beaumarchais for treating with D’Eon, 236;
    requires D’Eon’s disguise and resumption of female attire, 239,
        283, 289;
    receives the King’s secret papers, 259;
    defence of Beaumarchais, 295;
    general treatment of D’Eon, 301;
    confirms her annuity, 307

  Vergy, Treyssac de, calls at the French embassy in London, 112;
    a guest of de Guerchy, 112;
    gives warning to D’Eon, 113, 114;
    hostile message, 114;
    humbled by D’Eon, 117;
    confession of designs on D’Eon’s life, 163-168;
    sworn depositions, 171, 173, 193;
    death and will, 193

  Viri, Count, Sardinian envoy in London, his interest in D’Eon, 66;
    share in the restoration of peace, 72, 204;
    presents from Louis XV., 72

  Voltaire, a gift from Elizabeth, 23;
    threatened with defamation, 231;
    on a portrait of D’Eon, 300


  Waldegrave, Countess (later, married to the Duke of Gloucester), 198

  Wales, H.R.H. the Princess of, mother to George III., 152, 196, 197

  Wales, H.R.H. the Prince of, 308, 320, 326

  Wallis, Lady, 324

  Walmsley, Captain, 325

  Wilkes, John, _the patriot_, 156, 206, 310

  Wilkes, Miss, note to D’Eon, 280

  Williams, Sir C. Hanbury, ambassador to Russia, refuses to present
        Chevalier Douglas, and caution to Swedish minister, 12, 13;
    intercourse with Catherine, 16, 57;
    designation of D’Eon, 17;
    deceived by Woronzoff, 19;
    dignified message to the Count, 19;
    D’Eon’s repartee on Admiral Byng’s execution, 31

  Wilmot, Mr. Justice, 173, 194

  Wilson, Mr., 332

  Wolff, Baron, British Consul-General, 19

  Wood, Mr., Under Secretary of State, act of indiscretion, 61

  Woronzoff, Count Michel, vice-chancellor, 11;
    leader of the French party, 13, 17;
    receives the French secret envoy, 18;
    deception practised on English ambassador, 19;
    message from Sir Hanbury Williams, 19-20;
    message to Prince de Conti, 24;
    grand chancellor, 33;
    regret at losing D’Eon, 47;
    congratulates him on promotion, 83

  Wright, Mr., 214


  Yarborough, Earl of, 331

  Yates, Mr. Justice, 173, 194

  York, Duke of, 198

  Younge, Sir George, M.P., 201, 204


  Zenobio, Count, envoy from Venice, 324

                            LONDON: PRINTED BY
                 SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                          AND PARLIAMENT STREET




STANDARD BIOGRAPHICAL WORKS.


THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF LORD MACAULAY. By the Right Hon. G. O. TREVELYAN,
M.P.

    LIBRARY EDITION, 2 vols. 8vo. 36_s._
    CABINET EDITION, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12_s._
    POPULAR EDITION, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6_s._

THE EARLY HISTORY OF CHARLES JAMES FOX. By the Right Hon. G. O.
TREVELYAN, M.P.

    LIBRARY EDITION, 8vo. 18_s._
    CABINET EDITION, crown 8vo. 6_s._

REMINISCENCES. By THOMAS CARLYLE. Edited by J. A. FROUDE, M.A. 2 vols.
crown 8vo. 18_s._

THOMAS CARLYLE: A History of the First Forty Years of his Life, 1795 to
1835. By J. A. FROUDE, M.A. With 2 Portraits and 4 Illustrations. 2 vols.
8vo. 32_s._

THOMAS CARLYLE: A History of his Life in London, 1834 to 1881. By JAMES
A. FROUDE, M.A. With Portrait engraved on Steel. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

LETTERS AND MEMORIALS OF JANE WELSH CARLYLE. Prepared for publication by
THOMAS CARLYLE, and Edited by J. A. FROUDE, M.A. 3 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS. By F. MAX MÜLLER, K.M. Hon. Doctor of Law in the
Univ. of Cambridge; Foreign Member of the French Institute. 1 vol. crown
8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

AUTOBIOGRAPHY. By JOHN STUART MILL. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

JAMES MILL; A Biography. By A. BAIN, LL.D. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

JOHN STUART MILL; A Criticism, with Personal Recollections. By A. BAIN,
LL.D. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

OUTLINES OF THE LIFE OF SHAKESPEARE. By J. O. HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, F.R.S.
8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

LIFE OF THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON. By the Rev. G. R. GLEIG, M.A. Crown 8vo.
Portrait, 6_s._

MEMOIRS OF SIR HENRY HAVELOCK, K.C.B. By JOHN CLARK MARSHMAN. Crown 8vo.
3_s._ 6_d._

ESSAYS IN ECCLESIASTICAL BIOGRAPHY. By the Right Hon. Sir J. STEPHEN,
LL.D. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

BIOGRAPHICAL STUDIES. By the late WALTER BAGEHOT, M.A. 8vo. 12_s._

A DICTIONARY OF GENERAL BIOGRAPHY. By W. L. R. CATES. Fourth Edition.
With Supplement brought down to the end of 1884. 8vo. 28_s._

                      London: LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.




STANDARD HISTORICAL WORKS.


By Lord MACAULAY.

    _HISTORY of ENGLAND_ from the Accession of James II.

        STUDENT’S EDITION, 2 vols. cr. 8vo. 12_s._
        PEOPLE’S EDITION, 4 vols. cr. 8vo. 16_s._
        CABINET EDITION, 8 vols. post 8vo. price 48_s._
        LIBRARY EDITION, 5 vols. 8vo. £4.

By JAMES A. FROUDE.

    _HISTORY of ENGLAND_ from the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of
    the Spanish Armada.

        POPULAR EDITION, 12 vols. cr. 8vo. price £2. 2_s._
        CABINET EDITION, 12 vols. crown 8vo. £3. 12_s._

    _The ENGLISH in IRELAND_ in the Eighteenth Century. 3 vols.
    crown 8vo. 18_s._

By SAMUEL R. GARDINER.

    _HISTORY of ENGLAND_ from the ACCESSION of JAMES I. to the
    OUTBREAK of the GREAT CIVIL WAR. Cabinet Edition, in Ten
    Volumes, crown 8vo. 6_s._ each.

By W. E. H. LECKY.

    _HISTORY of ENGLAND_ in the 18th Century. 4 vols. 8vo.
    1700-1784. £3. 12_s._

    _The HISTORY of EUROPEAN MORALS_ from Augustus to Charlemagne.
    2 vols. crown 8vo. price 16_s._

    _HISTORY of THE RISE AND INFLUENCE_ of the Spirit of
    Rationalism in Europe. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

By Sir T. ERSKINE MAY.

    _The CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY of ENGLAND_ since the ACCESSION of
    GEORGE III. 1760-1870. 3 vols. crown 8vo. 18_s._

    _DEMOCRACY IN EUROPE_: a History. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

By A. DE TOCQUEVILLE.

    _DEMOCRACY in AMERICA_, translated by H. REEVE. 2 vols. crown
    8vo. 16_s._

By HENRY T. BUCKLE.

    _HISTORY of CIVILISATION_ in England and France, Spain and
    Scotland. 3 vols. cr. 8vo. 24_s._

By Rev. M. CREIGHTON.

    _HISTORY of THE PAPACY during the REFORMATION._ Vols. I. & II.
    1378-1464. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

By EDWARD A. FREEMAN.

    _The HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY of EUROPE._ With 65 Maps. 2 vols.
    8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

By Dean MERIVALE.

    _HISTORY of THE ROMANS UNDER the EMPIRE._ 8 vols. post 8vo.
    48_s._

By SPENCER WALPOLE.

    _HISTORY of ENGLAND_ from the Conclusion of the Great War in
    1815 to the Year 1841. 3 vols. 8vo. £2. 14_s._

By Sir W. STIRLING MAXWELL.

    _DON JOHN OF AUSTRIA_: or, Passages from the History of the
    Sixteenth Century, 1547-1578. With numerous Illustrations
    engraved on Wood, taken from Authentic Contemporary Sources.
    Library Edition. 2 vols. royal 8vo. 42_s._

By GEORGE LEWES.

    _The HISTORY of PHILOSOPHY_, from Thales to Comte. 2 vols. 8vo.
    32_s._

By Prof. G. RAWLINSON.

    _The SEVENTH GREAT ORIENTAL MONARCHY_; or, a History of the
    Sassanians. With Map and 95 Illustrations. 8vo. 28_s._

                      London: LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.




                                                              _July 1887._

Catalogue of Books

PUBLISHED BY

MESSRS. LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.

_39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C._


=Abbey.=—_THE ENGLISH CHURCH AND ITS BISHOPS_, 1700-1800. By CHARLES J.
ABBEY, Rector of Checkendon. 2 vols. 8vo. 24_s._

=Abbey and Overton.=—_THE ENGLISH CHURCH IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY._ By
CHARLES J. ABBEY, Rector of Checkendon, and JOHN H. OVERTON, Rector of
Epworth and Canon of Lincoln. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Abbott.=—_THE ELEMENTS OF LOGIC._ By T. K. ABBOTT, B.D. 12mo. 3_s._

=Acton.=—_MODERN COOKERY FOR PRIVATE FAMILIES._ By ELIZA ACTON. With 150
Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

=Æschylus.=—_THE EUMENIDES OF ÆSCHYLUS_: a Critical Edition, with
Metrical English Translation. By JOHN F. DAVIES, M.A. Professor of Latin
in the Queen’s College, Galway. 8vo. 7_s._

=A. K. H. B.=—_THE ESSAYS AND CONTRIBUTIONS OF A. K. H. B._—Uniform
Cabinet Editions in crown 8vo.

    Autumn Holidays of a Country Parson, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Changed Aspects of Unchanged Truths, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Commonplace Philosopher, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Counsel and Comfort from a City Pulpit, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Critical Essays of a Country Parson, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Graver Thoughts of a Country Parson. Three Series, 3_s._ 6_d._
    each.

    Landscapes, Churches, and Moralities, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Leisure Hours in Town, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Lessons of Middle Age, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Our Little Life. Two Series, 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

    Our Homely Comedy and Tragedy, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Present Day Thoughts, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Recreations of a Country Parson. Three Series, 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

    Seaside Musings, 3_s._ 6_d._

    Sunday Afternoons in the Parish Church of a Scottish University
    City, 3_s._ 6_d._

=Amos.=—_WORKS BY SHELDON AMOS._

    _A PRIMER OF THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT._ Crown
    8vo. 6_s._

    _A SYSTEMATIC VIEW OF THE SCIENCE OF JURISPRUDENCE._ 8vo. 18_s._

=Aristophanes.=—_THE ACHARNIANS OF ARISTOPHANES._ Translated into English
Verse by ROBERT YELVERTON TYRRELL, M.A. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Aristotle.=—_THE WORKS OF._

    _THE POLITICS_, G. Bekker’s Greek Text of Books I. III. IV.
    (VII.) with an English Translation by W. E. BOLLAND, M.A.; and
    short Introductory Essays by A. LANG, M.A. Crown 8vo. 7_s._
    6_d._

    _THE POLITICS_; Introductory Essays. By ANDREW LANG. (From
    Bolland and Lang’s ‘Politics.’) Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

    _THE ETHICS_; Greek Text, illustrated with Essays and Notes. By
    Sir ALEXANDER GRANT, Bart. M.A., LL.D. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

    _THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS_, Newly Translated into English. By
    ROBERT WILLIAMS, Barrister-at-Law. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Armstrong.=—_WORKS BY GEORGE FRANCIS ARMSTRONG, M.A._

    _POEMS_: Lyrical and Dramatic. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _KING SAUL._ (The Tragedy of Israel, Part I.) Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

    _KING DAVID._ (The Tragedy of Israel, Part II.) Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _KING SOLOMON._ (The Tragedy of Israel, Part III.) Fcp. 8vo.
    6_s._

    _UGONE_: A Tragedy. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _A GARLAND FROM GREECE_; Poems. Fcp. 8vo. 9_s._

    _STORIES OF WICKLOW_; Poems. Fcp. 8vo. 9_s._

    _VICTORIA REGINA ET IMPERATRIX_: a Jubilee Song from Ireland,
    1887. 4to. 5_s._ cloth gilt.

    _THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF EDMUND J. ARMSTRONG._ Fcp. 8vo. 7_s._
    6_d._

=Armstrong.=—_WORKS BY EDMUND J. ARMSTRONG._

    _POETICAL WORKS._ Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

    _ESSAYS AND SKETCHES._ Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

=Arnold.=—_WORKS BY THOMAS ARNOLD, D.D. Late Head-master of Rugby School._

    _INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON MODERN HISTORY_, delivered in 1841
    and 1842. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _SERMONS PREACHED MOSTLY IN THE CHAPEL OF RUGBY SCHOOL._ 6
    vols. crown 8vo. 30_s._ or separately, 5_s._ each.

    _MISCELLANEOUS WORKS._ 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Arnold.=—_A MANUAL OF ENGLISH LITERATURE_, Historical and Critical. By
THOMAS ARNOLD, M.A. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Arnott.=—_THE ELEMENTS OF PHYSICS OR NATURAL PHILOSOPHY._ By NEIL
ARNOTT, M.D. Edited by A. BAIN, LL.D. and A. S. TAYLOR, M.D. F.R.S.
Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

=Ashby.=—_NOTES ON PHYSIOLOGY FOR THE USE OF STUDENTS PREPARING FOR
EXAMINATION._ With 120 Woodcuts. By HENRY ASHBY, M.D. Lond. Fcp. 8vo.
5_s._

=Atelier (The) du Lys=; or, an Art Student in the Reign of Terror. By the
Author of ‘Mademoiselle Mori.’ Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Bacon.=—_THE WORKS AND LIFE OF._

    _COMPLETE WORKS._ Edited by R. L. ELLIS, M.A., J. SPEDDING,
    M.A. and D. D. HEATH. 7 vols. 8vo. £3. 13_s._ 6_d._

    _LETTERS AND LIFE, INCLUDING ALL HIS OCCASIONAL WORKS._ Edited
    by J. SPEDDING. 7 vols. 8vo. £4. 4_s._

    _THE ESSAYS_; with Annotations. By RICHARD WHATELY, D.D., 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE ESSAYS_; with Introduction, Notes, and Index. By E. A.
    ABBOTT, D.D. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. price 6_s._ Text and Index only,
    without Introduction and Notes, in 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Bentley.=—_A TEXT-BOOK OF ORGANIC MATERIA MEDICA._ Comprising
a Description of the VEGETABLE and ANIMAL DRUGS of the BRITISH
PHARMACOPŒIA, with some others in common use. Arranged Systematically and
especially Designed for Students. By ROBT. BENTLEY, M.R.C.S.Eng. F.L.S.
With 62 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=The BADMINTON LIBRARY=, edited by the DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G. assisted by
ALFRED E. T. WATSON.

    =Hunting.= By the DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G. and MOWBRAY MORRIS.
    With Contributions by the Earl of Suffolk and Berkshire, Rev.
    E. W. L. Davies, Digby Collins, and Alfred E. T. Watson. With
    Coloured Frontispiece and 53 Illustrations by J. Sturgess, J.
    Charlton, and Agnes M. Biddulph. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    =Fishing.= By H. CHOLMONDELEY-PENNELL. With Contributions by
    the Marquis of Exeter, Henry R. Francis, M.A., Major John P.
    Traherne, and G. Christopher Davies.

        Vol. I. Salmon, Trout, and Grayling. With 150 Illustrations.
          Cr. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._
        Vol. II. Pike and other Coarse Fish. With 58 Illustrations.
          Cr. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    =Racing and Steeplechasing.= By the EARL OF SUFFOLK, W. G.
    CRAVEN, The Hon. F. LAWLEY, A. COVENTRY, and A. E. T. WATSON.
    With Coloured Frontispiece and 56 Illustrations by J. Sturgess.
    Cr. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    =Shooting.= By Lord WALSINGHAM and Sir RALPH PAYNE-GALLWEY,
    with Contributions by Lord Lovat, Lord Charles Lennox Kerr,
    The Hon. G. Lascelles, and Archibald Stuart-Wortley. With 21
    full-page Illustrations and 149 Woodcuts in the text by A. J.
    Stuart-Wortley, Harper Pennington, C. Whymper, J. G. Millais,
    G. E. Lodge, and J. H. Oswald-Brown.

        Vol. I. Field and Covert. Cr. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._
        Vol. II. Moor and Marsh. Cr. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    =Cycling.= By VISCOUNT BURY, K.C.M.G. and G. LACY HILLIER. With
    19 Plates and 61 Woodcuts in the Text, by Viscount Bury and
    Joseph Pennell. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

                    ⁂ Other volumes in preparation.

=Bagehot.=—_WORKS BY WALTER BAGEHOT, M.A._

    _BIOGRAPHICAL STUDIES._ 8vo. 12_s._

    _ECONOMIC STUDIES._ 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _LITERARY STUDIES._ 2 vols. 8vo. Portrait. 28_s._

    _THE POSTULATES OF ENGLISH POLITICAL ECONOMY._ Crown 8vo. 2_s._
    6_d._

=Bagwell.=—_IRELAND UNDER THE TUDORS_, with a Succinct Account of the
Earlier History. By RICHARD BAGWELL, M.A. Vols. I. and II. From the first
invasion of the Northmen to the year 1578. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

=Bain.=—_WORKS BY ALEXANDER BAIN, LL.D._

    _MENTAL AND MORAL SCIENCE_; a Compendium of Psychology and
    Ethics, Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE SENSES AND THE INTELLECT._ 8vo. 15_s._

    _THE EMOTIONS AND THE WILL._ 8vo. 15_s._

    _PRACTICAL ESSAYS._ Cr. 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

    _LOGIC, DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTIVE._ PART I. _Deduction_, 4_s._
    PART II. _Induction_, 6_s._ 6_d._

    _JAMES MILL_; a Biography. Cr. 8vo. 5_s._

    _JOHN STUART MILL_; a Criticism, with Personal Recollections.
    Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Baker.=—_WORKS BY SIR SAMUEL W. BAKER, M.A._

    _EIGHT YEARS IN CEYLON._ Crown 8vo. Woodcuts. 5_s._

    _THE RIFLE AND THE HOUND IN CEYLON._ Crown 8vo. Woodcuts. 5_s._

=Ball.=—_THE REFORMED CHURCH OF IRELAND_ (1537-1886). By the Right Hon.
J. T. BALL, LL.D. D.C.L. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Barrett.=—_ENGLISH GLEES AND PART-SONGS._ An Inquiry into their
Historical Development. By WILLIAM ALEXANDER BARRETT. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Beaconsfield.=—_WORKS BY THE EARL OF BEACONSFIELD, K.G._

    _NOVELS AND TALES._ The Hughenden Edition. With 2 Portraits and
    11 Vignettes. 11 vols. Crown 8vo. 42_s._

        Endymion.
        Lothair.
        Coningsby.
        Sybil.
        Tancred.
        Venetia.
        Henrietta Temple.
        Contarini Fleming, &c.
        Alroy, Ixion, &c.
        The Young Duke, &c.
        Vivian Grey.

    _NOVELS AND TALES._ Cheap Edition, complete in 11 vols. Crown
    8vo. 1_s._ each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

    _THE WIT AND WISDOM OF THE EARL OF BEACONSFIELD._ Crown 8vo.
    1_s._ boards, 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

=Becker.=—_WORKS BY PROFESSOR BECKER, translated from the German by the
Rev. F. METCALF._

    _GALLUS_; or, Roman Scenes in the Time of Augustus. Post 8vo.
    7_s._ 6_d._

    _CHARICLES_; or, Illustrations of the Private Life of the
    Ancient Greeks. Post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Boultbee.=—_A COMMENTARY ON THE 39 ARTICLES_ of the Church of England.
By the Rev. T. P. BOULTBEE, LL.D. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Bourne.=—_WORKS BY JOHN BOURNE, C.E._

    _CATECHISM OF THE STEAM ENGINE_ in its various Applications
    in the Arts, to which is now added a chapter on Air and Gas
    Engines, and another devoted to Useful Rules, Tables, and
    Memoranda. Illustrated by 212 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _HANDBOOK OF THE STEAM ENGINE_; a Key to the Author’s Catechism
    of the Steam Engine. With 67 Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 9_s._

    _RECENT IMPROVEMENTS IN THE STEAM ENGINE_. With 124 Woodcuts.
    Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

=Bowen.=—_HARROW SONGS AND OTHER VERSES_. By EDWARD E. BOWEN. Fcp. 8vo.
2_s._ 6_d._; or printed on hand-made paper, 5_s._

=Brabazon.=—_SOCIAL ARROWS_: Re-printed Articles on various Social
Subjects. By Lord BRABAZON, Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards, 5_s._ cloth.

=Brabourne.=—_FRIENDS AND FOES FROM FAIRYLAND_. By the Right Hon. LORD
BRABOURNE. With 20 Illustrations by Linley Sambourne. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Brassey.=—_WORKS BY LADY BRASSEY._

    _A VOYAGE IN THE ‘SUNBEAM,’ OUR HOME ON THE OCEAN FOR ELEVEN
    MONTHS._

        Library Edition. With 8 Maps and Charts, and 118 Illustrations,
          8vo. 21_s._
        Cabinet Edition. With Map and 66 Illustrations, crown 8vo.
          7_s._ 6_d._
        School Edition. With 37 Illustrations, fcp. 2_s._ cloth, or
          3_s._ white parchment with gilt edges.
        Popular Edition. With 60 Illustrations, 4to. 6_d._ sewed,
          1_s._ cloth.

    _SUNSHINE AND STORM IN THE EAST._

        Library Edition. With 2 Maps and 114 Illustrations, 8vo. 21_s._
        Cabinet Edition. With 2 Maps and 114 Illustrations, crown 8vo.
          7_s._ 6_d._
        Popular Edition. With 103 Illustrations, 4to. 6_d._ sewed, 1_s._
          cloth.

    _IN THE TRADES, THE TROPICS, AND THE ‘ROARING FORTIES.’_

        Library Edition. With 8 Maps and Charts and 292 Illustrations,
          8vo. 21_s._
        Cabinet Edition. With Map and 220 Illustrations, crown 8vo. 7_s._
          6_d._
        Popular Edition. With 183 Illustrations, 4to. 2_s._ 6_d._ sewed,
          1_s._ cloth.

    _THREE VOYAGES IN THE ‘SUNBEAM.’_

        Popular Edition. With 346 Illustrations, 4to. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Browne.=—_AN EXPOSITION OF THE 39 ARTICLES_, Historical and Doctrinal.
By E. H. BROWNE, D.D., Bishop of Winchester. 8vo. 16_s._

=Buckle.=—_WORKS BY HENRY THOMAS BUCKLE._

    _HISTORY OF CIVILISATION IN ENGLAND AND FRANCE, SPAIN AND
    SCOTLAND._ 3 vols. crown 8vo. 24_s._

    _MISCELLANEOUS AND POSTHUMOUS WORKS._ A New and Abridged
    Edition. Edited by GRANT ALLEN, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 21_s._

=Buckton.=—_WORKS BY MRS. C. M. BUCKTON._

    _FOOD AND HOME COOKERY._ With 11 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 2_s._
    6_d._

    _HEALTH IN THE HOUSE._ With 41 Woodcuts and Diagrams. Crown
    8vo. 2_s._

    _OUR DWELLINGS._ With 39 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Bull.=—_WORKS BY THOMAS BULL, M.D._

    _HINTS TO MOTHERS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THEIR HEALTH_ during the
    Period of Pregnancy and in the Lying-in Room. Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._
    6_d._

    _THE MATERNAL MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE._
    Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

=Bullinger.=—_A CRITICAL LEXICON AND CONCORDANCE TO THE ENGLISH AND
GREEK NEW TESTAMENT._ Together with an Index of Greek Words and several
Appendices. By the Rev. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D. Royal 8vo. 15_s._

=Burnside and Panton.=—_THE THEORY OF EQUATIONS._ With an Introduction to
the Theory of Binary Algebraic Forms. By WILLIAM SNOW BURNSIDE, M.A. and
ARTHUR WILLIAM PANTON, M.A. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

=Burrows.=—_THE FAMILY OF BROCAS OF BEAUREPAIRE AND ROCHE COURT_,
Hereditary Masters of the Royal Buckhounds. With some account of the
English Rule in Aquitaine. By MONTAGU BURROWS, M.A. F.S.A. With 26
Illustrations of Monuments, Brasses, Seals, &c. Royal 8vo. 42_s._

=Cabinet Lawyer, The=; a Popular Digest of the Laws of England, Civil,
Criminal, and Constitutional. Fcp. 8vo. 9_s._

=Caddy.=—_THROUGH THE FIELDS WITH LINNÆUS._—By Mrs. CADDY. With 6
Illustrations and 2 Maps. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

=Carlyle.=—_THOMAS AND JANE WELSH CARLYLE._

    _THOMAS CARLYLE_, a History of the first Forty Years of his
    Life, 1795-1835. By J. A. FROUDE, M.A. With 2 Portraits and 4
    Illustrations, 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

    _THOMAS CARLYLE_, a History of his Life in London: from 1834 to
    his death in 1881. By J. A. FROUDE, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

    _LETTERS AND MEMORIALS OF JANE WELSH CARLYLE._ Prepared for
    publication by THOMAS CARLYLE, and edited by J. A. FROUDE, M.A.
    3 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

=Cates.=—_A DICTIONARY OF GENERAL BIOGRAPHY._ Fourth Edition, with
Supplement brought down to the end of 1884. By W. L. R. CATES. 8vo.
28_s._ cloth; 35_s._ half-bound russia.

=Cicero.=—_THE CORRESPONDENCE OF CICERO_: a revised Text, with Notes
and Prolegomena. By ROBERT Y. TYRRELL, M.A. Fellow of Trinity College,
Dublin. Vols. I. and II. 12_s._ each.

=Clerk.=—_THE GAS ENGINE._ By DUGALD CLERK. With 101 Illustrations and
Diagrams. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Coats.=—_A MANUAL OF PATHOLOGY._ By JOSEPH COATS, M.D. Pathologist to
the Western Infirmary and the Sick Children’s Hospital, Glasgow. With 339
Illustrations engraved on Wood. 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

=Colenso.=—_THE PENTATEUCH AND BOOK OF JOSHUA CRITICALLY EXAMINED._ By J.
W. COLENSO, D.D. late Bishop of Natal. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Comyn.=—_ATHERSTONE PRIORY_: a Tale. By L. N. COMYN. Crown 8vo. 2_s._
6_d._

=Conder.=—_A HANDBOOK TO THE BIBLE_, or Guide to the Study of the Holy
Scriptures derived from Ancient Monuments and Modern Exploration. By F.
R. CONDER, and Lieut. C. R. CONDER, R.E. Post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Conington.=—_WORKS BY JOHN CONINGTON, M.A._

    _THE ÆNEID OF VIRGIL._ Translated into English Verse. Crown
    8vo. 9_s._

    _THE POEMS OF VIRGIL._ Translated into English Prose. Crown
    8vo. 9_s._

=Conybeare & Howson.=—_THE LIFE AND EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL._ By the Rev. W.
J. CONYBEARE, M.A. and the Very Rev. J. S. HOWSON, D.D.

    Library Edition, with Maps, Plates, and Woodcuts. 2 vols. square
    crown 8vo. 21_s._

    Student’s Edition, revised and condensed, with 46 Illustrations
    and Maps. 1 vol. crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Cooke.=—_TABLETS OF ANATOMY._ By THOMAS COOKE, F.R.C.S. Eng. B.A. B.Sc.
M.D. Paris. Fourth Edition, being a selection of the Tablets believed to
be most useful to Students generally. Post 4to. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Cox.=—_THE FIRST CENTURY OF CHRISTIANITY._ By HOMERSHAM COX, M.A. 8vo.
12_s._

=Cox.=—_A GENERAL HISTORY OF GREECE_: from the Earliest Period to the
Death of Alexander the Great; with a Sketch of the History to the Present
Time. By the Rev. Sir G. W. COX, Bart., M.A. With 11 Maps and Plans.
Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

               ⁂ For other Works by Sir G. Cox, _see_
                    ‘Epochs of History,’ p. 24.

=Creighton.=—_HISTORY OF THE PAPACY DURING THE REFORMATION._ By the Rev.
M. CREIGHTON, M.A. 8vo. Vols. I. and II. 1378-1464, 32_s._; Vols. III.
and IV. 1464-1518, 24_s._

=Crookes.=—_SELECT METHODS IN CHEMICAL ANALYSIS_ (chiefly Inorganic). By
WILLIAM CROOKES, F.R.S. V.P.C.S. With 37 Illustrations. 8vo. 24_s._

=Crump.=—_A SHORT ENQUIRY INTO THE FORMATION OF POLITICAL OPINION_, from
the Reign of the Great Families to the Advent of Democracy. By ARTHUR
CRUMP. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Culley.=—_HANDBOOK OF PRACTICAL TELEGRAPHY._ By R. S. CULLEY, M. Inst.
C.E. Plates and Woodcuts. 8vo. 16_s._

=Dante.=—_THE DIVINE COMEDY OF DANTE ALIGHIERI._ Translated verse for
verse from the Original into Terza Rima. By JAMES INNES MINCHIN. Crown
8vo. 15_s._

=Davidson.=—_AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT._
Critical, Exegetical, and Theological. By the Rev. S. DAVIDSON, D.D.
LL.D. Revised Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 30_s._

=Davidson.=—_WORKS BY WILLIAM L. DAVIDSON, M.A._

    _THE LOGIC OF DEFINITION EXPLAINED AND APPLIED._ Crown 8vo.
    6_s._

    _LEADING AND IMPORTANT ENGLISH WORDS EXPLAINED AND
    EXEMPLIFIED._ Fcp. 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Decaisne & Le Maout.=—_A GENERAL SYSTEM OF BOTANY._ Translated from
the French of E. LE MAOUT, M.D., and J. DECAISNE, by Mrs. HOOKER; with
Additions by Sir J. D. HOOKER, C.B. F.R.S. Imp. 8vo. with 5,500 Woodcuts,
31_s._ 6_d._

=De Salis.=—_WORKS BY MRS. DE SALIS._

    _SAVOURIES À LA MODE._ Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ boards.

    _ENTRÉES À LA MODE._ Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._ boards.

=De Tocqueville.=—_DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA._ By ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE.
Translated by HENRY REEVE, C.B. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

=D’Herrisson.=—_THE BLACK CABINET._ By M. le Comte D’HERRISSON.
Translated from the French. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Dickinson.=—_ON RENAL AND URINARY AFFECTIONS._ By W. HOWSHIP DICKINSON,
M.D. Cantab. F.R.C.P. &c. With 12 Plates and 122 Woodcuts. 3 vols. 8vo.
£3. 4_s._ 6_d._

=Dixon.=—_RURAL BIRD LIFE_; Essays on Ornithology, with Instructions for
Preserving Objects relating to that Science. By CHARLES DIXON. With 45
Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

=Dowell.=—_A HISTORY OF TAXATION AND TAXES IN ENGLAND, FROM THE EARLIEST
TIMES TO THE PRESENT DAY._ By STEPHEN DOWELL, Assistant Solicitor of
Inland Revenue. 4 vols. 8vo. 48_s._

=Dublin University Press Series (The)=: a Series of Works, chiefly
Educational, undertaken by the Provost and Senior Fellows of Trinity
College, Dublin:

    Abbott’s (T. K.) Codex Rescriptus Dublinensis of St. Matthew.
    4to. 21_s._

    —— Evangeliorum Versio Antehieronymiana ex Codice Usseriano
    (Dublinensi). 2 vols. crown 8vo. 21_s._

    Burnside (W. S.) and Panton’s (A. W.) Theory of Equations. 8vo.
    12_s._ 6_d._

    Casey’s (John) Sequel to Euclid’s Elements. Crown 8vo. 3_s._
    6_d._

    —— Analytical Geometry of the Conic Sections. Crown 8vo. 7_s._
    6_d._

    Davies’s (J. F.) Eumenides of Æschylus. With Metrical English
    Translation. 8vo. 7_s._

    Dublin Translations into Greek and Latin Verse. Edited by R. Y.
    Tyrrell. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    Graves’s (R. P.) Life of Sir William Hamilton. (3 vols.) Vols.
    I. and II. 8vo. each 15_s._

    Griffin (R. W.) on Parabola, Ellipse, and Hyperbola, treated
    Geometrically. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    Haughton’s (Dr. S.) Lectures on Physical Geography. 8vo. 15_s._

    Hobart’s (W. K.) Medical Language of St. Luke. 8vo. 16_s._

    Leslie’s (T. E. Cliffe) Essays in Political and Moral
    Philosophy. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    Macalister’s (A.) Zoology and Morphology of Vertebrata. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    MacCullagh’s (James) Mathematical and other Tracts. 8vo. 15_s._

    Maguire’s (T.) Parmenides of Plato, Greek Text with English
    Introduction, Analysis, and Notes. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    Monck’s (W. H. S.) Introduction to Logic. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    Purser’s (J. M.) Manual of Histology. Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

    Roberts’s (R. A.) Examples in the Analytic Geometry of Plane
    Curves. Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

    Southey’s (R.) Correspondence with Caroline Bowles. Edited by
    E. Dowden. 8vo. 14_s._

    Thornhill’s (W. J.) The Æneid of Virgil, freely translated into
    English Blank Verse. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    Tyrrell’s (R. Y.) Cicero’s Correspondence. Vols. I. and II.
    8vo. each 12_s._

    —— The Acharnians of Aristophanes, translated into English
    Verse. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

    Webb’s (T. E.) Goethe’s Faust, Translation and Notes. 8vo.
    12_s._ 6_d._

    —— The Veil of Isis: a Series of Essays on Idealism. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    Wilkins’s (G.) The Growth of the Homeric Poems. 8vo. 6_s._

=Doyle.=—_THE OFFICIAL BARONAGE OF ENGLAND_. By JAMES E. DOYLE. Showing
the Succession, Dignities, and Offices of every Peer from 1066 to 1885.
Vols. I. to III. With 1,600 Portraits, Shields of Arms, Autographs, &c. 3
vols. 4to. £5. 5_s._

=Doyle.=—_REMINISCENCES AND OPINIONS, 1813-1885._ By Sir FRANCIS HASTINGS
DOYLE. 8vo. 16_s._

=Doyle.=—_WORKS BY J. A. DOYLE_, Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford.

    _THE ENGLISH IN AMERICA: VIRGINIA, MARYLAND, AND THE
    CAROLINAS_. 8vo. 18_s._

    _THE ENGLISH IN AMERICA: THE PURITAN COLONIES._ 2 vols. 8vo.
    36_s._

=Edersheim.=—_WORKS BY THE REV. ALFRED EDERSHEIM, D.D._

    _THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JESUS THE MESSIAH._ 2 vols. 8vo. 24_s._

    _PROPHECY AND HISTORY IN RELATION TO THE MESSIAH_: the
    Warburton Lectures, delivered at Lincoln’s Inn Chapel,
    1880-1884. 8vo. 12_s._

=Ellicott.=—_WORKS BY C. J. ELLICOTT, D.D._ Bishop of Gloucester and
Bristol.

    _A CRITICAL AND GRAMMATICAL COMMENTARY ON ST. PAUL’S EPISTLES._
    8vo.

        I. CORINTHIANS. 16_s._
        GALATIANS. 8_s._ 6_d._
        EPHESIANS. 8_s._ 6_d._
        PASTORAL EPISTLES. 10_s._ 6_d._
        PHILIPPIANS, COLOSSIANS, and PHILEMON. 10_s._ 6_d._
        THESSALONIANS. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _HISTORICAL LECTURES ON THE LIFE OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST._
    8vo. 12_s._

=English Worthies.= Edited by ANDREW LANG, M.A. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._
each.

    _DARWIN._ By GRANT ALLEN.

    _MARLBOROUGH._ By G. SAINTSBURY.

    _SHAFTESBURY (The First Earl)._ By H. D. TRAILL.

    _ADMIRAL BLAKE._ By DAVID HANNAY.

    _RALEIGH._ By EDMUND GOSSE.

    _STEELE._ By AUSTIN DOBSON.

    _BEN JONSON._ By J. A. SYMONDS.

    _CANNING._ By FRANK H. HILL.

                ⁂ Other Volumes are in preparation.

=Epochs of Ancient History.= 10 vols. fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ each. _See_
p. 24.

=Epochs of Church History.= Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ each. _See_ p. 24.

=Epochs of English History.= _See_ p. 24.

=Epochs of Modern History.= 18 vols. fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ each. _See_ p.
24.

=Erichsen.=—_WORKS BY JOHN ERIC ERICHSEN, F.R.S._

    _THE SCIENCE AND ART OF SURGERY_: Being a Treatise on Surgical
    Injuries, Diseases, and Operations. With 984 Illustrations. 2
    vols. 8vo. 42_s._

    _ON CONCUSSION OF THE SPINE, NERVOUS SHOCKS_, and other Obscure
    Injuries of the Nervous System. Cr. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Evans.=—_THE BRONZE IMPLEMENTS, ARMS, AND ORNAMENTS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
IRELAND._ By JOHN EVANS, D.C.L. 540 Illustrations. 8vo. 25_s._

=Ewald.=—_WORKS BY PROFESSOR HEINRICH EWALD_, of Göttingen.

    _THE ANTIQUITIES OF ISRAEL._ Translated from the German by H.
    S. SOLLY, M.A. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _THE HISTORY OF ISRAEL._ Translated from the German. 8 vols.
    8vo. Vols. I. and II. 24_s._ Vols. III. and IV. 21_s._ Vol. V.
    18_s._ Vol. VI. 16_s._ Vol. VII. 21_s._ Vol. VIII. with Index
    to the Complete Work. 18_s._

=Fairbairn.=—_WORKS BY SIR W. FAIRBAIRN, BART., C.E._

    _A TREATISE ON MILLS AND MILLWORK_, with 18 Plates and 333
    Woodcuts. 1 vol. 8vo. 25_s._

    _USEFUL INFORMATION FOR ENGINEERS._ With many Plates and
    Woodcuts. 3 vols. crown 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

=Farrar.=—_LANGUAGE AND LANGUAGES._ A Revised Edition of _Chapters on
Language and Families of Speech_. By F. W. FARRAR, D.D. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Fitzwygram.=—_HORSES AND STABLES._ By Major-General Sir F. FITZWYGRAM,
Bart. With 19 pages of Illustrations. 8vo. 5_s._

=Ford.=—_THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ARCHERY._ By the late HORACE FORD.
New Edition, thoroughly Revised and Re-written by W. BUTT, M.A. With
a Preface by C. J. LONGMAN, Senior Vice-President Royal Toxophilite
Society. 8vo. 14_s._

=Fox.=—_THE EARLY HISTORY OF CHARLES JAMES FOX._ By the Right Hon. Sir G.
O. TREVELYAN, Bart.

    Library Edition, 8vo. 18_s._
    Cabinet Edition, cr. 8vo. 6_s._

=Francis.=—_A BOOK ON ANGLING_; or, Treatise on the Art of Fishing in
every branch; including full Illustrated Lists of Salmon Flies. By
FRANCIS FRANCIS. Post 8vo. Portrait and Plates, 15_s._

=Freeman.=—_THE HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY OF EUROPE._ By E. A. FREEMAN, D.C.L.
With 65 Maps. 2 vols. 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

=Froude.=—_WORKS BY JAMES A. FROUDE, M.A._

    _THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND_, from the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat
    of the Spanish Armada.

        Cabinet Edition, 12 vols. cr. 8vo. £3. 12_s._
        Popular Edition, 12 vols. cr. 8vo. £2. 2_s._

    _SHORT STUDIES ON GREAT SUBJECTS._ 4 vols. crown 8vo. 24_s._

    _CÆSAR_: a Sketch. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY._ 3 vols.
    crown 8vo. 18_s._

    _OCEANA; OR, ENGLAND AND HER COLONIES._ With 9 Illustrations.
    Crown 8vo. 2_s._ boards, 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

    _THOMAS CARLYLE_, a History of the first Forty Years of his
    Life, 1795 to 1835. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

    _THOMAS CARLYLE_, a History of his Life in London from 1834 to
    his death in 1881. With Portrait engraved on steel. 2 vols.
    8vo. 32_s._

=Ganot.=—_WORKS BY PROFESSOR GANOT._ Translated by E. ATKINSON, Ph.D.
F.C.S.

    _ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON PHYSICS._ With 5 Coloured Plates and
    923 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 15_s._

    _NATURAL PHILOSOPHY FOR GENERAL READERS AND YOUNG PERSONS._
    With 2 Plates and 471 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Gardiner.=—_WORKS BY SAMUEL RAWSON GARDINER, LL.D._

    _HISTORY OF ENGLAND_, from the Accession of James I. to
    the Outbreak of the Civil War, 1603-1642. Cabinet Edition,
    thoroughly revised. 10 vols. crown 8vo. price 6_s._ each.

    _A HISTORY OF THE GREAT CIVIL WAR_, 1642-1649. (3 vols.) Vol.
    I. 1642-1644. With 24 Maps. 8vo. 21_s._

    _OUTLINE OF ENGLISH HISTORY_, B.C. 55-A.D. 1880. With 96
    Woodcuts, fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

                ⁂ For other Works, _see_ ‘Epochs of
                      Modern History,’ p. 24.

=Garrod.=—_WORKS BY ALFRED BARING GARROD, M.D. F.R.S._

    _A TREATISE ON GOUT AND RHEUMATIC GOUT (RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS)._
    With 6 Plates, comprising 21 Figures (14 Coloured), and 27
    Illustrations engraved on Wood. 8vo. 21_s._

    _THE ESSENTIALS OF MATERIA MEDICA AND THERAPEUTICS._ New
    Edition, revised and adapted to the New Edition of the British
    Pharmacopœia, by NESTOR TIRARD, M.D. Crown 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

=Gilkes.=—_BOYS AND MASTERS_: a Story of School Life. By A. H. GILKES,
M.A. Head Master of Dulwich College. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Goethe.=—_FAUST._ Translated by T. E. WEBB, LL.D. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _FAUST._ A New Translation, chiefly in Blank Verse; with
    Introduction and Notes. By JAMES ADEY BIRDS, B.A. F.G.S. Crown
    8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _FAUST._ The German Text, with an English Introduction and
    Notes for Students. By ALBERT M. SELSS, M.A. Ph.D. Crown 8vo.
    5_s._

=Goodeve.=—_WORKS BY T. M. GOODEVE, M.A._

    _PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS._ With 253 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE ELEMENTS OF MECHANISM._ With 342 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _A MANUAL OF MECHANICS_: an Elementary Text-Book for Students
    of Applied Mechanics. With 138 Illustrations and Diagrams, and
    141 Examples. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Grant.=—_THE ETHICS OF ARISTOTLE._ The Greek Text illustrated by Essays
and Notes. By Sir ALEXANDER GRANT, Bart. LL.D. D.C.L. &c. 2 vols. 8vo.
32_s._

=Gray.=—_ANATOMY, DESCRIPTIVE AND SURGICAL._ By HENRY GRAY, F.R.S.
late Lecturer on Anatomy at St. George’s Hospital. With 569 Woodcut
Illustrations, a large number of which are coloured. Re-edited by T.
PICKERING PICK, Surgeon to St. George’s Hospital. Royal 8vo. 36_s._

=Green.=—_THE WORKS OF THOMAS HILL GREEN_, late Fellow of Balliol
College, and Whyte’s Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of
Oxford. Edited by R. L. NETTLESHIP, Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford (3
vols.) Vols. I. and II.—Philosophical Works. 8vo. 16_s._ each.

=Greville.=—_WORKS BY C. C. F. GREVILLE._

    _A JOURNAL OF THE REIGN OF QUEEN VICTORIA_, from 1837 to 1852.
    3 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

    _A JOURNAL OF THE REIGN OF QUEEN VICTORIA_, from 1852 to 1860.
    2 vols. 8vo. 24_s._

=Grove.=—_THE CORRELATION OF PHYSICAL FORCES._ By the Hon. Sir W. R.
GROVE, F.R.S. &c. 8vo. 15_s._

=Gwilt.=—_AN ENCYCLOPÆDIA OF ARCHITECTURE._ By JOSEPH GWILT, F.S.A.
Illustrated with more than 1,100 Engravings on Wood. Revised, with
Alterations and Considerable Additions, by WYATT PAPWORTH. 8vo. 52_s._
6_d._

=Haggard.=—_WORKS BY H. RIDER HAGGARD._

    _SHE: A HISTORY OF ADVENTURE._ Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _ALLAN QUATERMAIN._ With 31 Illustrations by C. H. M. KERR.
    Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Halliwell-Phillipps.=—_OUTLINES OF THE LIFE OF SHAKESPEARE._ By J. O.
HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, F.R.S. 2 vols. Royal 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Hamilton.=—_LIFE OF SIR WILLIAM R. HAMILTON_, Kt. LL.D. D.C.L. M.R.I.A.
&c. By the Rev. R. P. GRAVES, M.A. (3 vols.) Vols. I. and II. 8vo. 15_s._
each.

=Harte.=—_NOVELS BY BRET HARTE._

    _IN THE CARQUINEZ WOODS._ Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._
    cloth.

    _ON THE FRONTIER._ Three Stories. 16mo. 1_s._

    _BY SHORE AND SEDGE._ Three Stories. 16mo. 1_s._

=Hartwig.=—_WORKS BY DR. G. HARTWIG._

    _THE SEA AND ITS LIVING WONDERS._ With 12 Plates and 303
    Woodcuts. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE TROPICAL WORLD._ With 8 Plates, and 172 Woodcuts. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE POLAR WORLD._ With 3 Maps, 8 Plates, and 85 Woodcuts. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE SUBTERRANEAN WORLD._ With 3 Maps and 80 Woodcuts. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE AERIAL WORLD._ With Map, 8 Plates, and 60 Woodcuts. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    _SEA MONSTERS AND SEA BIRDS._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    2_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _DENIZENS OF THE DEEP._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2_s._
    6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

The following books are extracted from the above works by Dr. HARTWIG:—

    _DWELLERS IN THE ARCTIC REGIONS._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    2_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _WINGED LIFE IN THE TROPICS._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    2_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _VOLCANOES AND EARTHQUAKES._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    2_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _WILD ANIMALS OF THE TROPICS._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    3_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Hassall.=—_THE INHALATION TREATMENT OF DISEASES OF THE ORGANS OF
RESPIRATION_, including Consumption. By ARTHUR HILL HASSALL, M.D. With 19
Illustrations of Apparatus. Cr. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

=Haughton.=—_SIX LECTURES ON PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY_, delivered in 1876, with
some Additions. By the Rev. SAMUEL HAUGHTON, F.R.S. M.D. D.C.L. With 23
Diagrams. 8vo. 15_s._

=Havelock.=—_MEMOIRS OF SIR HENRY HAVELOCK, K.C.B._ By JOHN CLARK
MARSHMAN. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Hearn.=—_THE GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND_; its Structure and its Development.
By WILLIAM EDWARD HEARN, Q.C. 8vo. 16_s._

=Helmholtz.=—_WORKS BY PROFESSOR HELMHOLTZ._

    _ON THE SENSATIONS OF TONE AS A PHYSIOLOGICAL BASIS FOR THE
    THEORY OF MUSIC._ Royal 8vo. 28_s._

    _POPULAR LECTURES ON SCIENTIFIC SUBJECTS._ With 68 Woodcuts. 2
    vols. Crown 8vo. 15_s._ or separately, 7_s._ 6_d._ each.

=Herschel.=—_OUTLINES OF ASTRONOMY._ By Sir J. F. W. HERSCHEL, Bart. M.A.
With Plates and Diagrams. Square crown 8vo. 12_s._

=Hester’s Venture=: a Novel. By the Author of ‘The Atelier du Lys.’ Crown
8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Hewitt.=—_THE DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF DISEASES OF WOMEN, INCLUDING
THE DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY._ By GRAILY HEWITT, M.D. With 211 Engravings.
8vo. 24_s._

=Historic Towns.= Edited by E. A. FREEMAN, D.C.L. and Rev. WILLIAM HUNT,
M.A. With Maps and Plans. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

    _LONDON._ By W. E. LOFTIE.
    _EXETER._ By E. A. FREEMAN.
    _BRISTOL._ By W. HUNT.
    _OXFORD._ By C. W. BOASE.

                   ⁂ Other Volumes in preparation.

=Hobart.=—_SKETCHES FROM MY LIFE._ By Admiral HOBART PASHA. With
Portrait. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Hobart.=—_THE MEDICAL LANGUAGE OF ST. LUKE_: a Proof from Internal
Evidence that St. Luke’s Gospel and the Acts were written by the same
person, and that the writer was a Medical Man. By the Rev. W. K. HOBART,
LL.D. 8vo. 16_s._

=Holmes.=—_A SYSTEM OF SURGERY_, Theoretical and Practical, in Treatises
by various Authors. Edited by TIMOTHY HOLMES, M.A. and J. W. HULKE,
F.R.S. 3 vols. royal 8vo. £4. 4_s._

=Homer.=—_THE ILIAD OF HOMER_, Homometrically translated by C. B. CAYLEY.
8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _THE ILIAD OF HOMER._ The Greek Text, with a Verse Translation,
    by W. C. GREEN, M.A. Vol. I. Books I.-XII. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Hopkins.=—_CHRIST THE CONSOLER_; a Book of Comfort for the Sick. By
ELLICE HOPKINS. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Howitt.=—_VISITS TO REMARKABLE PLACES_, Old Halls, Battle-Fields, Scenes
illustrative of Striking Passages in English History and Poetry. By
WILLIAM HOWITT. With 80 Illustrations engraved on Wood. Crown 8vo. 7_s._
6_d._

=Hudson & Gosse.=—_THE ROTIFERA OR ‘WHEEL-ANIMALCULES.’_ By C. T. HUDSON,
LL.D. and P. H. GOSSE, F.R.S. With 30 Coloured Plates. In 6 Parts. 4to.
10_s._ 6_d._ each. Complete in 2 vols. 4to. £3. 10_s._

=Hullah.=—_WORKS BY JOHN HULLAH, LL.D._

    _COURSE OF LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF MODERN MUSIC._ 8vo. 8_s._
    6_d._

    _COURSE OF LECTURES ON THE TRANSITION PERIOD OF MUSICAL
    HISTORY._ 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Hume.=—_THE PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS OF DAVID HUME._ Edited by T. H. GREEN,
M.A. and the Rev. T. H. GROSE, M.A. 4 vols. 8vo. 56_s._ Or separately,
Essays, 2 vols. 28_s._ Treatise of Human Nature. 2 vols. 28_s._

=In the Olden Time=: a Tale of the Peasant War in Germany. By the Author
of ‘Mademoiselle Mori.’ Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Ingelow.=—_WORKS BY JEAN INGELOW._

    _POETICAL WORKS._ Vols. 1 and 2. Fcp. 8vo. 12_s._

    _LYRICAL AND OTHER POEMS._ Selected from the Writings of JEAN
    INGELOW. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth plain; 3_s._ cloth gilt.

    _THE HIGH TIDE ON THE COAST OF LINCOLNSHIRE._ With 40
    Illustrations, drawn and engraved under the supervision of
    GEORGE T. ANDREW. Royal 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt
    edges.

=Jackson.=—_AID TO ENGINEERING SOLUTION._ By LOWIS D’A. JACKSON, C.E.
With 111 Diagrams and 5 Woodcut Illustrations. 8vo. 21_s._

=Jameson.=—_WORKS BY MRS. JAMESON._

    _LEGENDS OF THE SAINTS AND MARTYRS._ With 19 Etchings and 187
    Woodcuts. 2 vols. 31_s._ 6_d._

    _LEGENDS OF THE MADONNA_, the Virgin Mary as represented in
    Sacred and Legendary Art. With 27 Etchings and 165 Woodcuts. 1
    vol. 21_s._

    _LEGENDS OF THE MONASTIC ORDERS._ With 11 Etchings and 88
    Woodcuts. 1 vol. 21_s._

    _HISTORY OF THE SAVIOUR_, His Types and Precursors. Completed
    by Lady EASTLAKE. With 13 Etchings and 281 Woodcuts. 2 vols.
    42_s._

=Jeans.=—_WORKS BY J. S. JEANS._

    _ENGLAND’S SUPREMACY_: its Sources, Economics, and Dangers.
    8vo. 8_s._ 6_d._

    _RAILWAY PROBLEMS_: An Inquiry into the Economic Conditions of
    Railway Working in Different Countries. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

=Johnson.=—_THE PATENTEE’S MANUAL_; a Treatise on the Law and Practice of
Letters Patent. By J. JOHNSON and J. H. JOHNSON. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Johnston.=—_A GENERAL DICTIONARY OF GEOGRAPHY_, Descriptive, Physical,
Statistical, and Historical; a complete Gazetteer of the World. By KEITH
JOHNSTON. Medium 8vo. 42_s._

=Jordan.=—_WORKS BY WILLIAM LEIGHTON JORDAN, F.R.G.S._

    _THE OCEAN_: a Treatise on Ocean Currents and Tides and their
    Causes, 8vo. 21_s._

    _THE NEW PRINCIPLES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY._ With 13 plates.
    8vo. 21_s._

    _THE WINDS_: an Essay in Illustration of the New Principles of
    Natural Philosophy. Crown 8vo. 2_s._

    _THE STANDARD OF VALUE._ Crown 8vo. 5_s._

=Jukes.=—_WORKS BY ANDREW JUKES._

    _THE NEW MAN AND THE ETERNAL LIFE._ Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE TYPES OF GENESIS._ Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _THE SECOND DEATH AND THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS._ Crown
    8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _THE MYSTERY OF THE KINGDOM._ Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Justinian.=—_THE INSTITUTES OF JUSTINIAN_; Latin Text, chiefly that of
Huschke, with English Introduction, Translation, Notes, and Summary. By
THOMAS C. SANDARS, M.A. 8vo. 18_s._

=Kalisch.=—_WORKS BY M. M. KALISCH, M.A._

    _BIBLE STUDIES._ Part I. The Prophecies of Balaam. 8vo. 10_s._
    6_d._ Part II. The Book of Jonah. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _COMMENTARY ON THE OLD TESTAMENT_; with a New Translation. Vol.
    I. Genesis, 8vo. 18_s._ or adapted for the General Reader,
    12_s._ Vol. II. Exodus, 15_s._ or adapted for the General
    Reader, 12_s._ Vol. III. Leviticus, Part I. 15_s._ or adapted
    for the General Reader, 8_s._ Vol. IV. Leviticus, Part II.
    15_s._ or adapted for the General Reader, 8_s._

    _HEBREW GRAMMAR._ With Exercises. Part I. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._
    Key, 5_s._ Part II. 12_s._ 6_d._

=Kant.=—_WORKS BY EMMANUEL KANT._

    _CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON._ Translated by Thomas Kingsmill
    Abbott, B.D. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _INTRODUCTION TO LOGIC, AND HIS ESSAY ON THE MISTAKEN SUBTILTY
    OF THE FOUR FIGURES._ Translated by Thomas Kingsmill Abbott,
    B.D. With a few Notes by S. T. Coleridge. 8vo. 6_s._

=Killick.=—_HANDBOOK TO MILL’S SYSTEM OF LOGIC._ By the Rev. A. H.
KILLICK, M.A. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Knowledge Library.= (_See_ PROCTOR’S Works, p. 16.)

=Kolbe.=—_A SHORT TEXT-BOOK OF INORGANIC CHEMISTRY._ By Dr. HERMANN
KOLBE. Translated from the German by T. S. HUMPIDGE, Ph.D. With a
Coloured Table of Spectra and 66 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Ladd.=—_ELEMENTS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY_: a Treatise of the
Activities and Nature of the Mind from the Physical and Experimental
Point of View. By GEORGE T. LADD. With 113 Illustrations and Diagrams.
8vo. 21_s._

=Lang.=—_WORKS BY ANDREW LANG._

    _LETTERS TO DEAD AUTHORS._ Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._ 6_d._

    _BOOKS AND BOOKMEN._ With 2 Coloured Plates and 17
    Illustrations. Cr. 8vo. 6_s._ 6_d._

    _CUSTOM AND MYTH_; Studies of Early Usage and Belief. With 15
    Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Latham.=—_HANDBOOK OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE._ By ROBERT G. LATHAM, M.A.
M.D. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Lecky.=—_WORKS BY W. E. H. LECKY._

    _HISTORY OF ENGLAND IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY._ 8vo. Vols. I. &
    II. 1700-1760. 36_s._ Vols. III. & IV. 1760-1784. 36_s._ Vols.
    V. & VI. 1784-1793. 36_s._

    _THE HISTORY OF EUROPEAN MORALS FROM AUGUSTUS TO CHARLEMAGNE._
    2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

    _HISTORY OF THE RISE AND INFLUENCE OF THE SPIRIT OF RATIONALISM
    IN EUROPE._ 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

=Lewes.=—_THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY_, from Thales to Comte. By GEORGE
HENRY LEWES. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

=Liddell & Scott.=—_A GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON._ Compiled by HENRY GEORGE
LIDDELL, D.D. Dean of Christ Church; and ROBERT SCOTT, D.D. Dean of
Rochester. 4to. 36_s._

=Liveing.=—_WORKS BY ROBERT LIVEING, M.A. and M.D. Cantab._

    _HANDBOOK ON DISEASES OF THE SKIN._ With especial reference to
    Diagnosis and Treatment. Fcp 8vo. 5_s._

    _NOTES ON THE TREATMENT OF SKIN DISEASES._ 18mo. 3_s._

=Lloyd.=—_A TREATISE ON MAGNETISM_, General and Terrestrial. By H. LLOYD,
D.D. D.C.L. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Lloyd.=—_THE SCIENCE OF AGRICULTURE._ By F. J. LLOYD. 8vo. 12_s._

=Longman.=—_HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND TIMES OF EDWARD III._ By WILLIAM
LONGMAN, F.S.A. With 9 Maps, 8 Plates, and 16 Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo.
28_s._

=Longman.=—_WORKS BY FREDERICK W. LONGMAN, Balliol College, Oxon._

    _CHESS OPENINGS._ Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

    _FREDERICK THE GREAT AND THE SEVEN YEARS’ WAR._ With 2 Coloured
    Maps. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

    _A NEW POCKET DICTIONARY OF THE GERMAN AND ENGLISH LANGUAGES._
    Square 18mo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Longman’s Magazine.= Published Monthly. Price Sixpence.

    Vols. 1-9, 8vo. price 5_s._ each.

=Longmore.=—_GUNSHOT INJURIES_; Their History, Characteristic Features,
Complications, and General Treatment. By Surgeon-General Sir T. LONGMORE,
C.B., F.R.C.S. With 58 Illustrations. 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

=Loudon.=—_WORKS BY J. C. LOUDON, F.L.S._

    _ENCYCLOPÆDIA OF GARDENING_; the Theory and Practice of
    Horticulture, Floriculture, Arboriculture, and Landscape
    Gardening. With 1,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21_s._

    _ENCYCLOPÆDIA OF AGRICULTURE_; the Laying-out, Improvement, and
    Management of Landed Property; the Cultivation and Economy of
    the Productions of Agriculture. With 1,100 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21_s._

    _ENCYCLOPÆDIA OF PLANTS_; the Specific Character, Description,
    Culture, History, &c. of all Plants found in Great Britain.
    With 12,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. 42_s._

=Lubbock.=—_THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION AND THE PRIMITIVE CONDITION OF
MAN._ By Sir J. Lubbock, Bart. M.P. F.R.S. With Illustrations. 8vo. 18_s._

=Lyra Germanica=; Hymns Translated from the German by Miss C. WINKWORTH.
Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

=Macalister.=—_AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SYSTEMATIC ZOOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGY
OF VERTEBRATE ANIMALS._ By A. MACALISTER, M.D. With 28 Diagrams. 8vo.
10_s._ 6_d._

=Macaulay.=—_WORKS AND LIFE OF LORD MACAULAY._

    _HISTORY OF ENGLAND FROM THE ACCESSION OF JAMES THE SECOND_:

        Student’s Edition, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12_s._
        People’s Edition, 4 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._
        Cabinet Edition, 8 vols. post 8vo. 48_s._
        Library Edition, 5 vols. 8vo. £4.

    _CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS, WITH LAYS OF ANCIENT ROME_, in
    1 volume:

        Authorised Edition, crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ or 3_s._ 6_d._
          gilt edges.
        Popular Edition, crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

    _CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS_:

        Student’s Edition, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6_s._
        People’s Edition, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 8_s._
        Cabinet Edition, 4 vols. post 8vo. 24_s._
        Library Edition, 3 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

    _ESSAYS_ which may be had separately price 6_d._ each sewed,
    1_s._ each cloth:

        Addison and Walpole.
        Frederick the Great.
        Croker’s Boswell’s Johnson.
        Hallam’s Constitutional History.
        Warren Hastings. (3_d._ sewed, 6_d._ cloth.)
        The Earl of Chatham (Two Essays).
        Ranke and Gladstone.
        Milton and Machiavelli.
        Lord Bacon.
        Lord Clive.
        Lord Byron, and The Comic Dramatists of the Restoration.

    The Essay on Warren Hastings annotated by S. HALES, 1_s._ 6_d._

    The Essay on Lord Clive annotated by H. COURTHOPE BOWEN, M.A.
    2_s._ 6_d._

    _SPEECHES_:

        People’s Edition, crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS_:

        Library Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 21_s._
        People’s Edition, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

    _LAYS OF ANCIENT ROME_, _&c._

        Illustrated by G. Scharf, fcp. 4to. 10_s._ 6_d._

        —— Popular Edition, fcp. 4to. 6_d._ sewed, 1_s._ cloth.

        Illustrated by J. R. Weguelin, crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth
        extra, gilt edges.

        —— Cabinet Edition, post 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

        —— Annotated Edition, fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ sewed, 1_s._ 6_d._
        cloth, or 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF LORD MACAULAY._ Edited, with
    Occasional Notes, by the Right Hon. Sir G. O. TREVELYAN, Bart.
    Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS AND SPEECHES_:

        Student’s Edition, in ONE VOLUME, crown 8vo. 6_s._
        Cabinet Edition, including Indian Penal Code, Lays of Ancient
          Rome, and Miscellaneous Poems, 4 vols. post 8vo. 24_s._

    _THE COMPLETE WORKS OF LORD MACAULAY._ Edited by his Sister,
    Lady TREVELYAN.

        Library Edition, with Portrait, 8 vols. demy 8vo. £5. 5_s._
        Cabinet Edition, 16 vols. post 8vo. £4. 16_s._

    _THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF LORD MACAULAY._ By the Right Hon. Sir
    G. O. TREVELYAN, Bart.

        Popular Edition, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6_s._
        Cabinet Edition, 2 vols. post 8vo. 12_s._
        Library Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

=Macdonald.=—_WORKS BY GEORGE MACDONALD, LL.D._

    _UNSPOKEN SERMONS._ First Series. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _UNSPOKEN SERMONS._ Second Series. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _THE MIRACLES OF OUR LORD._ Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _A BOOK OF STRIFE, IN THE FORM OF THE DIARY OF AN OLD SOUL_:
    Poems. 12mo. 6_s._

=Macfarren.=—_LECTURES ON HARMONY_, delivered at the Royal Institution.
By Sir G. A. MACFARREN. 8vo. 12_s._

=Macleod.=—_WORKS BY HENRY D. MACLEOD, M.A._

    _PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICAL PHILOSOPHY._ In 2 vols. Vol. I. 8vo.
    15_s._ Vol. II. PART 1. 12_s._

    _THE ELEMENTS OF ECONOMICS._ In 2 vols. Vol. I. crown 8vo.
    7_s._ 6_d._ Vol. II. PART 1, crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _THE ELEMENTS OF BANKING._ Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF BANKING._ Vol. I. 8vo. 12_s._ Vol.
    II. 14_s._

=McCulloch.=—_THE DICTIONARY OF COMMERCE AND COMMERCIAL NAVIGATION_ of
the late J. R. MCCULLOCH, of H.M. Stationery Office. Latest Edition,
containing the most recent Statistical Information by A. J. WILSON. 1
vol. medium 8vo. with 11 Maps and 30 Charts, price 63_s._ cloth, or
70_s._ strongly half-bound in russia.

=Mademoiselle Mori=: a Tale of Modern Rome. By the Author of ‘The Atelier
du Lys.’ Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Mahaffy.=—_A HISTORY OF CLASSICAL GREEK LITERATURE._ By the Rev. J.
P. MAHAFFY, M.A. Crown 8vo. Vol. I. Poets, 7_s._ 6_d._ Vol. II. Prose
Writers, 7_s._ 6_d._

=Malmesbury.=—_MEMOIRS OF AN EX-MINISTER_: an Autobiography. By the Earl
of MALMESBURY, G.C.B. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Manning.=—_THE TEMPORAL MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST_; or, Reason and
Revelation. By H. E. MANNING, D.D. Cardinal-Archbishop. Crown 8vo. 8_s._
6_d._

=Martineau.=—_WORKS BY JAMES MARTINEAU, D.D._

    _HOURS OF THOUGHT ON SACRED THINGS._ Two Volumes of Sermons. 2
    vols. crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ each.

    _ENDEAVOURS AFTER THE CHRISTIAN LIFE._ Discourses. Crown 8vo.
    7_s._ 6_d._

=Maunder’s Treasuries.=

    _BIOGRAPHICAL TREASURY._ Reconstructed, revised, and brought
    down to the year 1882, by W. L. R. CATES. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _TREASURY OF NATURAL HISTORY_; or, Popular Dictionary of
    Zoology. Fcp. 8vo. with 900 Woodcuts, 6_s._

    _TREASURY OF GEOGRAPHY_, Physical, Historical, Descriptive, and
    Political. With 7 Maps and 16 Plates. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _HISTORICAL TREASURY_; Outlines of Universal History, Separate
    Histories of all Nations. Revised by the Rev. Sir G. W. COX,
    Bart. M.A. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _TREASURY OF KNOWLEDGE AND LIBRARY OF REFERENCE._ Comprising an
    English Dictionary and Grammar, Universal Gazetteer, Classical
    Dictionary, Chronology, Law Dictionary, &c. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _SCIENTIFIC AND LITERARY TREASURY_: a Popular Encyclopædia of
    Science, Literature, and Art. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE TREASURY OF BIBLE KNOWLEDGE_; being a Dictionary of the
    Books, Persons, Places, Events, and other matters of which
    mention is made in Holy Scripture. By the Rev. J. AYRE, M.A.
    With 5 Maps, 15 Plates, and 300 Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE TREASURY OF BOTANY_, or Popular Dictionary of the
    Vegetable Kingdom. Edited by J. LINDLEY, F.R.S. and T. MOORE,
    F.L.S. With 274 Woodcuts and 20 Steel Plates. Two Parts, fcp.
    8vo. 12_s._

=May.=—_WORKS BY THE RIGHT HON. SIR THOMAS ERSKINE MAY, K.C.B._

    _THE CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND SINCE THE ACCESSION OF
    GEORGE III, 1760-1870._ 3 vols. crown 8vo. 18_s._

    _DEMOCRACY IN EUROPE_; a History. 2 vols. 8vo. 32_s._

=Melville.=—_NOVELS BY G. J. WHYTE MELVILLE._ Crown 8vo. 1_s._ each,
boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

    The Gladiators.
    The Interpreter.
    Good for Nothing.
    The Queen’s Maries.
    Holmby House.
    Kate Coventry.
    Digby Grand.
    General Bounce.

=Mendelssohn.=—_THE LETTERS OF FELIX MENDELSSOHN._ Translated by Lady
WALLACE. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 10_s._

=Merivale.=—_WORKS BY THE VERY REV. CHARLES MERIVALE, D.D. Dean of Ely._

    _HISTORY OF THE ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE._ 8 vols. post 8vo.
    48_s._

    _THE FALL OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC_: a Short History of the Last
    Century of the Commonwealth. 12mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _GENERAL HISTORY OF ROME FROM B.C. 753 TO A.D. 476._ Crown 8vo.
    7_s._ 6_d._

    _THE ROMAN TRIUMVIRATES._ With Maps. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Mill.=—_ANALYSIS OF THE PHENOMENA OF THE HUMAN MIND._ By JAMES MILL.
With Notes, Illustrative and Critical. 2 vols. 8vo. 28_s._

=Mill.=—_WORKS BY JOHN STUART MILL._

    _PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY._

        Library Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 30_s._
        People’s Edition, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _A SYSTEM OF LOGIC_, Ratiocinative and Inductive. Crown 8vo.
    5_s._

    _ON LIBERTY._ Crown 8vo. 1_s._ 4_d._

    _ON REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT._ Crown 8vo. 2_s._

    _AUTOBIOGRAPHY._ 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _UTILITARIANISM._ 8vo. 5_s._

    _THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN._ Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _EXAMINATION OF SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON’S PHILOSOPHY._ 8vo. 16_s._

    _NATURE, THE UTILITY OF RELIGION, AND THEISM._ Three Essays.
    8vo. 5_s._

=Miller.=—_WORKS BY W. ALLEN MILLER, M.D. LL.D._

    _THE ELEMENTS OF CHEMISTRY_, Theoretical and Practical.
    Re-edited, with Additions, by H. MACLEOD, F.C.S. 3 vols. 8vo.

        Vol. I. CHEMICAL PHYSICS, 16_s._
        Vol. II. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY, 24_s._
        Vol. III. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY, 31_s._ 6_d._

    _AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF INORGANIC CHEMISTRY._ With 71
    Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Mitchell.=—_A MANUAL OF PRACTICAL ASSAYING._ By JOHN MITCHELL, F.C.S.
Revised, with the Recent Discoveries incorporated. By W. CROOKES, F.R.S.
8vo. Woodcuts, 31_s._ 6_d._

=Molesworth.=—_MARRYING AND GIVING IN MARRIAGE_: a Novel. By Mrs.
MOLESWORTH. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Monsell.=—_WORKS BY THE REV. J. S. B. MONSELL, LL.D._

    _SPIRITUAL SONGS FOR THE SUNDAYS AND HOLYDAYS THROUGHOUT THE
    YEAR._ Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._ 18mo. 2_s._

    _THE BEATITUDES._ Eight Sermons. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _HIS PRESENCE NOT HIS MEMORY._ Verses. 16mo. 1_s._

=Mulhall.=—_HISTORY OF PRICES SINCE THE YEAR 1850._ By MICHAEL G.
MULHALL. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Müller.=—_WORKS BY F. MAX MÜLLER, M.A._

    _BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS._ Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _SELECTED ESSAYS ON LANGUAGE, MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGION._ 2 vols.
    crown 8vo. 16_s._

    _LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE._ 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

    _INDIA, WHAT CAN IT TEACH US?_ A Course of Lectures delivered
    before the University of Cambridge. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _HIBBERT LECTURES ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF RELIGION_, as
    illustrated by the Religions of India. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _INTRODUCTION TO THE SCIENCE OF RELIGION_: Four Lectures
    delivered at the Royal Institution. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _THE SCIENCE OF THOUGHT._ 8vo. 21_s._

    _A SANSKRIT GRAMMAR FOR BEGINNERS._ New and Abridged Edition,
    accented and transliterated throughout, with a chapter
    on Syntax and an Appendix on Classical Metres. By A. A.
    MACDONELLL, M.A. Ph.D. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Murchison.=—_WORKS BY CHARLES MURCHISON, M.D. LL.D. &c._

    _A TREATISE ON THE CONTINUED FEVERS OF GREAT BRITAIN._ Revised
    by W. CAYLEY, M.D. Physician to the Middlesex Hospital. 8vo.
    with numerous Illustrations, 25_s._

    _CLINICAL LECTURES ON DISEASES OF THE LIVER, JAUNDICE, AND
    ABDOMINAL DROPSY._ Revised by T. LAUDER BRUNTON, M.D. and Sir
    JOSEPH FAYRER, M.D. 8vo. with 43 Illustrations, 24_s._

=Napier.=—_THE LIFE OF SIR JOSEPH NAPIER, BART. EX-LORD CHANCELLOR OF
IRELAND._ From his Private Correspondence. By ALEX. CHARLES EWALD, F.S.A.
With Portrait on Steel, engraved by G. J. Stodart, from a Photograph.
8vo. 15_s._

=Nelson.=—_LETTERS AND DESPATCHES OF HORATIO, VISCOUNT NELSON._ Selected
and arranged by JOHN KNOX LAUGHTON, M.A. 8vo. 16_s._

=Nesbit.=—_LAYS AND LEGENDS._ By E. NESBIT. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

=New Testament (The)= of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Illustrated
with Engravings on Wood after Paintings by the Early Masters. 4to. 21_s._
cloth extra.

=Newman.=—_WORKS BY CARDINAL NEWMAN._

    _APOLOGIA PRO VITÂ SUÂ._ Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY DEFINED AND ILLUSTRATED._ Crown 8vo.
    7_s._

    _HISTORICAL SKETCHES._ 3 vols. crown 8vo. 6_s._ each.

    _DISCUSSIONS AND ARGUMENTS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS._ Crown 8vo.
    6_s._

    _AN ESSAY ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE._ Crown 8vo.
    6_s._

    _CERTAIN DIFFICULTIES FELT BY ANGLICANS IN CATHOLIC TEACHING
    CONSIDERED._ Vol. 1, crown 8vo 7_s._ 6_d._; Vol. 2, crown 8vo.
    5_s._ 6_d._

    _THE VIA MEDIA OF THE ANGLICAN CHURCH, ILLUSTRATED IN LECTURES
    &C._ 2 vols. crown 8vo. 6_s._ each.

    _ESSAYS, CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL._ 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12_s._

    _ESSAYS ON BIBLICAL AND ON ECCLESIASTICAL MIRACLES._ Crown 8vo.
    6_s._

    _AN ESSAY IN AID OF A GRAMMAR OF ASSENT._ 7_s._ 6_d._

=Noble.=—_HOURS WITH A THREE-INCH TELESCOPE._ By Captain W. NOBLE,
F.R.A.S. &c. With a Map of the Moon. Crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

=Northcott.=—_LATHES AND TURNING_, Simple, Mechanical, and Ornamental. By
W. H. NORTHCOTT. With 338 Illustrations. 8vo. 18_s._

=O’Hagan.=—_SELECTED SPEECHES AND ARGUMENTS OF THE RIGHT HON. THOMAS
BARON O’HAGAN._ Edited by GEORGE TEELING. 8vo. 16_s._

=Oliphant.=—_NOVELS BY MRS. OLIPHANT._

    _MADAM._—Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

    _IN TRUST._—Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

=Outlines of Jewish History.=—From B.C. 586 to C.E. 1885. By the Author
of ‘About the Jews since Bible Times.’ Revised by M. Friedländer, Ph.D.
With 3 Maps. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Overton.=—_LIFE IN THE ENGLISH CHURCH (1660-1714)._ By J. H. OVERTON,
M.A. Rector of Epworth. 8vo. 14_s._

=Owen.=—_THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE VERTEBRATE
ANIMALS._ By Sir RICHARD OWEN, K.C.B. &c. With 1,472 Woodcuts. 3 vols.
8vo. £3. 13_s._ 6_d._

=Paget.=—_WORKS BY SIR JAMES PAGET, BART. F.R.S. D.C.L. &C._

    _CLINICAL LECTURES AND ESSAYS._ Edited by F. HOWARD MARSH,
    Assistant-Surgeon to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital. 8vo. 15_s._

    _LECTURES ON SURGICAL PATHOLOGY._ Re-edited by the AUTHOR and
    W. TURNER, M.B. 8vo. with 131 Woodcuts, 21_s._

=Pasteur.=—_LOUIS PASTEUR_, his Life and Labours. By his SON-IN-LAW.
Translated from the French by Lady CLAUD HAMILTON. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Payen.=—_INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY_; a Manual for Manufacturers and for
Colleges or Technical Schools; a Translation of PAYEN’S ‘Précis de Chimie
Industrielle.’ Edited by B. H. PAUL. With 698 Woodcuts. Medium 8vo. 42_s._

=Payn.=—_NOVELS BY JAMES PAYN._

    _THE LUCK OF THE DARRELLS._ Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._
    6_d._ cloth.

    _THICKER THAN WATER._ Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._
    cloth.

=Pears.=—_THE FALL OF CONSTANTINOPLE_: being the Story of the Fourth
Crusade. By EDWIN PEARS, LL.B. Barrister-at-Law, late President of the
European Bar at Constantinople, and Knight of the Greek Order of the
Saviour. 8vo. 16_s._

=Perring.=—_HARD KNOTS IN SHAKESPEARE._ By Sir PHILIP PERRING, Bart. 8vo.
7_s._ 6_d._

=Piesse.=—_THE ART OF PERFUMERY_, and the Methods of Obtaining the Odours
of Plants; with Instructions for the Manufacture of Perfumes, &c. By G.
W. S. PIESSE, Ph.D. F.C.S. With 96 Woodcuts, square crown 8vo. 21_s._

=Pole.=—_THE THEORY OF THE MODERN SCIENTIFIC GAME OF WHIST._ By W. POLE,
F.R.S. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Proctor.=-_-WORKS BY R. A. PROCTOR._

    _THE SUN_; Ruler, Light, Fire, and Life of the Planetary
    System. With Plates and Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 14_s._

    _THE ORBS AROUND US_; a Series of Essays on the Moon and
    Planets, Meteors and Comets. With Chart and Diagrams, crown
    8vo. 5_s._

    _OTHER WORLDS THAN OURS_; The Plurality of Worlds Studied
    under the Light of Recent Scientific Researches. With 14
    Illustrations, crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _THE MOON_; her Motions, Aspects, Scenery, and Physical
    Condition. With Plates, Charts, Woodcuts, and Lunar
    Photographs, crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _UNIVERSE OF STARS_; Presenting Researches into and New Views
    respecting the Constitution of the Heavens. With 22 Charts and
    22 Diagrams, 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _LARGER STAR ATLAS_ for the Library, in 12 Circular Maps, with
    Introduction and 2 Index Pages. Folio, 15_s._ or Maps only,
    12_s._ 6_d._

    _NEW STAR ATLAS_ for the Library, the School, and the
    Observatory, in 12 Circular Maps (with 2 Index Plates). Crown
    8vo. 5_s._

    _LIGHT SCIENCE FOR LEISURE HOURS_; Familiar Essays on
    Scientific Subjects, Natural Phenomena, &c. 3 vols. crown 8vo.
    5_s._ each.

    _CHANCE AND LUCK_; a Discussion of the Laws of Luck,
    Coincidences, Wagers, Lotteries, and the Fallacies of Gambling
    &c. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _STUDIES OF VENUS-TRANSITS_; an Investigation of the
    Circumstances of the Transits of Venus in 1874 and 1882. With 7
    Diagrams and 10 Plates. 8vo. 5_s._

=The ‘KNOWLEDGE’ LIBRARY.= Edited by RICHARD A. PROCTOR.

    _HOW TO PLAY WHIST: WITH THE LAWS AND ETIQUETTE OF WHIST._ By
    R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _HOME WHIST_: an Easy Guide to Correct Play. By R. A. PROCTOR.
    16mo. 1_s._

    _THE POETRY OF ASTRONOMY._ A Series of Familiar Essays. By R.
    A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _NATURE STUDIES._ By GRANT ALLEN, A. WILSON, T. FOSTER, E.
    CLODD, and R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _LEISURE READINGS._ By E. CLODD, A. WILSON, T. FOSTER, A. C.
    RUNYARD, and R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE STARS IN THEIR SEASONS._ An Easy Guide to a Knowledge of
    the Star Groups, in 12 Large Maps. By R. A. PROCTOR. Imperial
    8vo. 5_s._

    _STAR PRIMER._ Showing the Starry Sky Week by Week, in 24
    Hourly Maps. By R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 4to. 2_s._ 6_d._

    _THE SEASONS PICTURED IN 48 SUN-VIEWS OF THE EARTH_, and 24
    Zodiacal Maps, &c. By R. A. PROCTOR. Demy 4to. 5_s._

    _STRENGTH AND HAPPINESS._ By R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _ROUGH WAYS MADE SMOOTH._ Familiar Essays on Scientific
    Subjects. By R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _OUR PLACE AMONG INFINITIES._ A Series of Essays contrasting
    our Little Abode in Space and Time with the Infinities Around
    us. By R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _THE EXPANSE OF HEAVEN._ Essays on the Wonders of the
    Firmament. By R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _PLEASANT WAYS IN SCIENCE._ By R. A. PROCTOR. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _MYTHS AND MARVELS OF ASTRONOMY._ By R. A. PROCTOR. Cr. 8vo.
    6_s._

=Pryce.=—_THE ANCIENT BRITISH CHURCH_: an Historical Essay. By JOHN
PRYCE, M.A. Canon of Bangor. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Quain’s Elements of Anatomy.= The Ninth Edition. Re-edited by ALLEN
THOMSON, M.D. LL.D. F.R.S.S.L.&E. EDWARD ALBERT SCHÄFER, F.R.S. and
GEORGE DANCER THANE. With upwards of 1,000 Illustrations engraved on
Wood, of which many are Coloured. 2 vols. 8vo. 18_s._ each.

=Quain.=—_A DICTIONARY OF MEDICINE._ By Various Writers. Edited by R.
QUAIN, M.D. F.R.S. &c. With 138 Woodcuts. Medium 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._ cloth,
or 40_s._ half-russia; to be had also in 2 vols. 34_s._ cloth.

=Reader.=—_WORKS BY EMILY E. READER._

    _THE GHOST OF BRANKINSHAW_ and other Tales. With 9 Full-page
    Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _VOICES FROM FLOWER-LAND_, in Original Couplets. A
    Birthday-Book and Language of Flowers. 16mo. 2_s._ 6_d._ limp
    cloth; 3_s._ 6_d._ roan, gilt edges, or in vegetable vellum,
    gilt top.

    _FAIRY PRINCE FOLLOW-MY-LEAD_; or, the _MAGIC BRACELET_.
    Illustrated by WM. READER. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ gilt edges;
    or 3_s._ 6_d._ vegetable vellum, gilt edges.

    _THE THREE GIANTS &c._ Royal 16mo. 1_s._ cloth.

    _THE MODEL BOY &c._ Royal 16mo. 1_s._ cloth.

    _BE YT HYS WHO FYNDS YT._ Royal 16mo. 1_s._ cloth.

=Reeve.=—_COOKERY AND HOUSEKEEPING._ By Mrs. HENRY REEVE. With 8 Coloured
Plates and 37 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Rich.=—_A DICTIONARY OF ROMAN AND GREEK ANTIQUITIES._ With 2,000
Woodcuts. By A. RICH, B.A. Cr. 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Richardson.=—_WORKS BY BENJAMIN WARD RICHARDSON, M.D._

    _THE HEALTH OF NATIONS_: a Review of the Works—Economical,
    Educational, Sanitary, and Administrative—of EDWIN CHADWICK,
    C.B. With a Biographical Dissertation by BENJAMIN WARD
    RICHARDSON, M.D. F.R.S. 2 vols. 8vo. 28_s._

    _THE COMMONHEALTH_: a Series of Essays on Health and Felicity
    for Every-Day Readers. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Riley.=—_ATHOS, OR THE MOUNTAIN OF THE MONKS._ By ATHELSTAN RILEY. With
Map and numerous Illustrations. 8vo.

=Rivers.=—_WORKS BY THOMAS RIVERS._

    _THE ORCHARD-HOUSE._ With 25 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _THE MINIATURE FRUIT GARDEN_; or, the Culture of Pyramidal and
    Bush Fruit Trees, with Instructions for Root Pruning. With 32
    Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. 4_s._

=Robinson.=—_THE NEW ARCADIA_, and other Poems. By A. MARY F. ROBINSON.
Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Roget.=—_THESAURUS OF ENGLISH WORDS AND PHRASES_, Classified and
Arranged so as to facilitate the Expression of Ideas and assist in
Literary Composition. By PETER M. ROGET. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Ronalds.=—_THE FLY-FISHER’S ENTOMOLOGY._ By ALFRED RONALDS. With 20
Coloured Plates. 8vo. 14_s._

=Saintsbury.=—_MANCHESTER_: a Short History. By GEORGE SAINTSBURY. With 2
Maps. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Schäfer.=—_THE ESSENTIALS OF HISTOLOGY, DESCRIPTIVE AND PRACTICAL._ For
the use of Students. By E. A. SCHÄFER, F.R.S. With 281 Illustrations.
8vo. 6_s._ or Interleaved with Drawing Paper, 8_s._ 6_d._

=Schellen.=—_SPECTRUM ANALYSIS IN ITS APPLICATION TO TERRESTRIAL
SUBSTANCES_, and the Physical Constitution of the Heavenly Bodies. By Dr.
H. SCHELLEN. Translated by JANE and CAROLINE LASSELL. Edited by Capt. W.
DE W. ABNEY. With 14 Plates (including Angström’s and Cornu’s Maps) and
291 Woodcuts. 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

=Seebohm.=—_WORKS BY FREDERIC SEEBOHM._

    _THE OXFORD REFORMERS—JOHN COLET, ERASMUS, AND THOMAS MORE_; a
    History of their Fellow-Work. 8vo. 14_s._

    _THE ENGLISH VILLAGE COMMUNITY_ Examined in its Relations to
    the Manorial and Tribal Systems, &c. 13 Maps and Plates. 8vo.
    16_s._

    _THE ERA OF THE PROTESTANT REVOLUTION._ With Map. Fcp. 8vo.
    2_s._ 6_d._

=Sennett.=—_THE MARINE STEAM ENGINE_; a Treatise for the use of
Engineering Students and Officers of the Royal Navy. By RICHARD SENNETT,
Engineer-in-Chief of the Royal Navy. With 244 Illustrations. 8vo. 21_s._

=Sewell.=—_STORIES AND TALES._ By ELIZABETH M. SEWELL. Crown 8vo. 1_s._
each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth plain; 2_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth
extra, gilt edges:—

    Amy Herbert.
    The Earl’s Daughter.
    The Experience of Life.
    A Glimpse of the World.
    Cleve Hall.
    Katharine Ashton.
    Margaret Percival.
    Laneton Parsonage.
    Ursula.
    Gertrude.
    Ivors.

=Shakespeare.=—_BOWDLER’S FAMILY SHAKESPEARE._ Genuine Edition, in 1 vol.
medium 8vo. large type, with 36 Woodcuts, 14_s._ or in 6 vols. fcp. 8vo.
21_s._

    _OUTLINES OF THE LIFE OF SHAKESPEARE._ By J. O.
    HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS, F.R.S. 2 vols. Royal 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Shilling Standard Novels.=

    _BY THE EARL OF BEACONSFIELD._

        Vivian Grey.
        Venetia.
        Tancred.
        Sybil.
        Coningsby.
        Alroy, Ixion, &c.
        The Young Duke, &c.
        Contarini Fleming, &c.
        Henrietta Temple.
        Lothair.
        Endymion.

            Price 1_s._ each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

    _BY G. J. WHYTE-MELVILLE._

        The Gladiators.
        The Interpreter.
        Good for Nothing.
        Queen’s Maries.
        Holmby House.
        Kate Coventry.
        Digby Grand.
        General Bounce.

             Price 1_s._ each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

    _BY ELIZABETH M. SEWELL._

        Amy Herbert.
        Gertrude.
        Earl’s Daughter.
        The Experience of Life.
        Cleve Hall.
        A Glimpse of the World.
        Ivors.
        Katharine Ashton.
        Margaret Percival.
        Laneton Parsonage.
        Ursula.

             Price 1_s._ each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth,
              plain; 2_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _BY ANTHONY TROLLOPE._

        The Warden.
        Barchester Towers.

             Price 1_s._ each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

    _BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON._

        The Dynamiter.
        Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.

             Price 1_s._ each, sewed; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

    _BY BRET HARTE._

        In the Carquinez Woods. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.
        On the Frontier (Three Stories). 1_s._ sewed.
        By Shore and Sedge (Three Stories). 1_s._ sewed.

    _BY MRS. OLIPHANT._

        In Trust.
        Madam.

    _BY JAMES PAYN._

        Thicker than Water.
        The Luck of the Darrells.

             Price 1_s._ each, boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ each, cloth.

=Short.=—_SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND TO THE
REVOLUTION OF 1688._ By T. V. SHORT, D.D. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Smith, H. F.=—_THE HANDBOOK FOR MIDWIVES._ By HENRY FLY SMITH, M.B.
Oxon. M.R.C.S. late Assistant-Surgeon at the Hospital for Sick Women,
Soho Square. With 41 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

=Smith, R. Bosworth.=—_CARTHAGE AND THE CARTHAGINIANS._ By R. BOSWORTH
SMITH, M.A. Maps, Plans, &c. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Smith, Rev. Sydney.=—_THE WIT AND WISDOM OF THE REV. SYDNEY SMITH._
Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

=Smith, T.=—_A MANUAL OF OPERATIVE SURGERY ON THE DEAD BODY._ By THOMAS
SMITH, Surgeon to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital. A New Edition, re-edited by
W. J. WALSHAM. With 46 Illustrations. 8vo. 12_s._

=Southey.=—_THE POETICAL WORKS OF ROBERT SOUTHEY_, with the Author’s last
Corrections and Additions. Medium 8vo. with Portrait, 14_s._

=Stanley.=—_A FAMILIAR HISTORY OF BIRDS._ By E. STANLEY, D.D. Revised and
enlarged, with 160 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Steel.=—_A TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF THE OX_; being a Manual of Bovine
Pathology specially adapted for the use of Veterinary Practitioners
and Students. By J. H. STEEL, M.R.C.V.S.F.Z.S. With 2 Plates and 116
Woodcuts. 8vo. 15_s._

=Stephen.=—_ESSAYS IN ECCLESIASTICAL BIOGRAPHY._ By the Right Hon. Sir J.
STEPHEN, LL.D. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

=Stevenson.=—_WORKS BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON._

    _A CHILD’S GARDEN OF VERSES._ Small fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

    _THE DYNAMITER._ Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ swd. 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

    _STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE._ Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._
    sewed; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

=‘Stonehenge.’=—_THE DOG IN HEALTH AND DISEASE._ By ‘STONEHENGE.’ With 84
Wood Engravings. Square crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

    _THE GREYHOUND._ By ‘STONEHENGE.’ With 25 Portraits of
    Greyhounds, &c. Square crown 8vo. 15_s._

=Stoney.=—_THE THEORY OF THE STRESSES ON GIRDERS AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES._
With Practical Observations on the Strength and other Properties of
Materials. By BINDON B. STONEY, LL.D. F.R.S. M.I.C.E. With 5 Plates, and
143 Illustrations in the Text. Royal 8vo. 36_s._

=Sturgis.=—_THRALDOM_: a Story. By JULIAN STURGIS. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Sully.=—_WORKS BY JAMES SULLY._

    _OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY_, with Special Reference to the Theory
    of Education. 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

    _THE TEACHER’S HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOLOGY_, on the Basis of
    ‘Outlines of Psychology.’ Crown 8vo. 6_s._ 6_d._

=Supernatural Religion=; an Inquiry into the Reality of Divine
Revelation. Complete Edition, thoroughly revised. 3 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

=Swinburne.=—_PICTURE LOGIC_; an Attempt to Popularise the Science of
Reasoning. By A. J. SWINBURNE, B.A. Post 8vo. 5_s._

=Taylor.=—_STUDENT’S MANUAL OF THE HISTORY OF INDIA_, from the Earliest
Period to the Present Time. By Colonel MEADOWS TAYLOR, C.S.I. Crown 8vo.
7_s._ 6_d._

=Text-Books of Science=: a Series of Elementary Works on Science, adapted
for the use of Students in Public and Science Schools. Fcp. 8vo. fully
illustrated with Woodcuts. _See_ p. 23.

=Thompson.=—_WORKS BY D. GREENLEAF THOMPSON._

    _THE PROBLEM OF EVIL_: an Introduction to the Practical
    Sciences. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _A SYSTEM OF PSYCHOLOGY._ 2 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

=Thomson’s Conspectus.=—Adapted to the British Pharmacopœia of 1885.
Edited by NESTOR TIRARD, M.D. Lond. F.R.C.P. New Edition, with an
Appendix containing notices of some of the more important non-official
medicines and preparations. 18mo. 6_s._

=Thomson.=—_AN OUTLINE OF THE NECESSARY LAWS OF THOUGHT_; a Treatise on
Pure and Applied Logic. By W. THOMSON, D.D. Archbishop of York. Crown
8vo. 6_s._

=Three in Norway.= By Two of THEM. With a Map and 59 Illustrations on
Wood from Sketches by the Authors. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ boards; 2_s._ 6_d._
cloth.

=Todd.=—_ON PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT IN ENGLAND_: its Origin,
Development, and Practical Operation. By ALPHEUS TODD, LL.D. C.M.G.
Librarian of Parliament for the Dominion of Canada. Second Edition, by
his SON. In Two Volumes—VOL. I. 8vo. 24_s._

=Trevelyan.=—_WORKS BY THE RIGHT HON. SIR G. O. TREVELYAN, BART._

    _THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF LORD MACAULAY._

        LIBRARY EDITION, 2 vols. 8vo. 36_s._
        CABINET EDITION, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12_s._
        POPULAR EDITION, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 6_s._

    _THE EARLY HISTORY OF CHARLES JAMES FOX._

        Library Edition, 8vo. 18_s._
        Cabinet Edition, crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Trollope.=—_NOVELS BY ANTHONY TROLLOPE._

    _THE WARDEN._ Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

    _BARCHESTER TOWERS._ Crown 8vo. 1_s._ boards; 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

=Twiss.=—_WORKS BY SIR TRAVERS TWISS._

    _THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF NATIONS_, considered as Independent
    Communities in Time of War. 8vo. 21_s._

    _THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF NATIONS IN TIME OF PEACE._ 8vo. 15_s._

=Tyndall.=—_WORKS BY JOHN TYNDALL, F.R.S. &c._

    _FRAGMENTS OF SCIENCE._ 2 vols. crown 8vo. 16_s._

    _HEAT A MODE OF MOTION._ Crown 8vo. 12_s._

    _SOUND._ With 204 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _ESSAYS ON THE FLOATING-MATTER OF THE AIR_ in relation to
    Putrefaction and Infection. With 24 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 7_s._
    6_d._

    _LECTURES ON LIGHT_, delivered in America in 1872 and 1873.
    With 57 Diagrams. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _LESSONS IN ELECTRICITY AT THE ROYAL INSTITUTION, 1875-76._
    With 58 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

    _NOTES OF A COURSE OF SEVEN LECTURES ON ELECTRICAL PHENOMENA
    AND THEORIES_, delivered at the Royal Institution. Crown 8vo.
    1_s._ sewed, 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

    _NOTES OF A COURSE OF NINE LECTURES ON LIGHT_, delivered at the
    Royal Institution. Crown 8vo. 1_s._ sewed, 1_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

    _FARADAY AS A DISCOVERER._ Fcp. 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Ville.=—_ON ARTIFICIAL MANURES_, their Chemical Selection and Scientific
Application to Agriculture. By GEORGES VILLE. Translated and edited by W.
CROOKES, F.R.S. With 31 Plates. 8vo. 21_s._

=Virgil.=—_PUBLI VERGILI MARONIS BUCOLICA, GEORGICA, ÆNEIS_; the Works of
VIRGIL, Latin Text, with English Commentary and Index. By B. H. KENNEDY,
D.D. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

_THE ÆNEID OF VIRGIL._ Translated into English Verse. By J. CONINGTON,
M.A. Crown 8vo. 9_s._

_THE ÆNEID OF VIRGIL FREELY TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BLANK VERSE._ By
WILLIAM J. THORNHILL, B.A. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

_THE POEMS OF VIRGIL._ Translated into English Prose. By JOHN CONINGTON,
M.A. Crown 8vo. 9_s._

=Vitzthum.=—_ST. PETERSBURG AND LONDON IN THE YEARS 1852-1864_:
Reminiscences of Count CHARLES FREDERICK VITZTHUM VON ECKSTOEDT, late
Saxon Minister at the Court of St. James’. Edited, with a Preface, by
HENRY REEVE, C.B. D.C.L. 2 vols. 8vo. 30_s._

=Walker.=—_THE CORRECT CARD_; or, How to Play at Whist; a Whist
Catechism. By Major A. CAMPBELL-WALKER, F.R.G.S. Fcp. 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Walpole.=—_HISTORY OF ENGLAND FROM THE CONCLUSION OF THE GREAT WAR IN
1815._ By SPENCER WALPOLE. 5 vols. 8vo. Vols. I. and II. 1815-1832,
36_s._; Vol. III. 1832-1841, 18_s._; Vols. IV. and V. 1841-1858, 36_s._

=Waters.=—_PARISH REGISTERS IN ENGLAND_: their History and Contents. With
Suggestions for Securing their better Custody and Preservation. By ROBERT
E. CHESTER WATERS, B.A. 8vo. 5_s._

=Watts.=—_A DICTIONARY OF CHEMISTRY AND THE ALLIED BRANCHES OF OTHER
SCIENCES._ Edited by HENRY WATTS, F.R.S. 9 vols. medium 8vo. £15. 2_s._
6_d._

=Webb.=—_CELESTIAL OBJECTS FOR COMMON TELESCOPES._ By the Rev. T. W.
WEBB. Map, Plate, Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 9_s._

=Webb.=—_THE VEIL OF ISIS_: a Series of Essays on Idealism. By THOMAS W.
WEBB, LL.D. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Wellington.=—_LIFE OF THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON._ By the Rev. G. R. GLEIG,
M.A. Crown 8vo. Portrait. 6_s._

=West.=—_WORKS BY CHARLES WEST, M.D. &c._ Founder of, and formerly
Physician to, the Hospital for Sick Children.

    _LECTURES ON THE DISEASES OF INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD._ 8vo. 18_s._

    _THE MOTHER’S MANUAL OF CHILDREN’S DISEASES._ Crown 8vo. 2_s._
    6_d._

=Whately.=—_ENGLISH SYNONYMS._ By E. JANE WHATELY. Edited by her Father,
R. WHATELY, D.D. Fcp. 8vo. 3_s._

=Whately.=—_WORKS BY R. WHATELY, D.D._

    _ELEMENTS OF LOGIC._ Crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

    _ELEMENTS OF RHETORIC._ Crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._

    _LESSONS ON REASONING._ Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._ 6_d._

    _BACON’S ESSAYS_, with Annotations. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=White and Riddle.=—_A LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY._ By J. T. WHITE, D.D.
Oxon. and J. J. E. RIDDLE, M.A. Oxon. Founded on the larger Dictionary of
Freund. Royal 8vo. 21_s._

=White.=—_A CONCISE LATIN-ENGLISH DICTIONARY_, for the Use of Advanced
Scholars and University Students. By the Rev. J. T. WHITE, D.D. Royal
8vo. 12_s._

=Wilcocks.=—_THE SEA FISHERMAN._ Comprising the Chief Methods of Hook and
Line Fishing in the British and other Seas, and Remarks on Nets, Boats,
and Boating. By J. C. WILCOCKS. Profusely Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

=Wilkins.=—_THE GROWTH OF THE HOMERIC POEMS_: a Discussion of their
Origin and Authorship. By GEORGE WILKINS, M.A., late Scholar, Trinity
College, Dublin. 8vo. 6_s._

=Wilkinson.=—_THE FRIENDLY SOCIETY MOVEMENT_: Its Origin, Rise, and
Growth; its Social, Moral, and Educational Influences.—_THE AFFILIATED
ORDERS._—By the Rev. JOHN FROME WILKINSON, M.A. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Williams.=—_MANUAL OF TELEGRAPHY._ By W. WILLIAMS, Superintendent of
Indian Government Telegraphs. Illustrated by 93 Wood Engravings. 8vo.
10_s._ 6_d._

=Willich.=—_POPULAR TABLES_ for giving Information for ascertaining the
value of Lifehold, Leasehold, and Church Property, the Public Funds, &c.
By CHARLES M. WILLICH. Edited by H. BENCE JONES. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Wilson.=—_A MANUAL OF HEALTH-SCIENCE._ Adapted for Use in Schools and
Colleges, and suited to the Requirements of Students preparing for the
Examinations in Hygiene of the Science and Art Department, &c. By ANDREW
WILSON, F.R.S.E. F.L.S. &c. With 74 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Witt.=—_WORKS BY PROF. WITT._ Translated from the German by FRANCES
YOUNGHUSBAND.

    _THE TROJAN WAR._ With a Preface by the Rev. W. G. RUTHERFORD,
    M.A. Head-Master of Westminster School. Crown 8vo. 2_s._

    _MYTHS OF HELLAS_; or, Greek Tales. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _THE WANDERINGS OF ULYSSES._ Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

=Wood.=—_WORKS BY REV. J. G. WOOD._

    _HOMES WITHOUT HANDS_; a Description of the Habitations of
    Animals, classed according to the Principle of Construction.
    With 140 Illustrations. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _INSECTS AT HOME_; a Popular Account of British Insects, their
    Structure, Habits, and Transformations. With 700 Illustrations.
    8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _INSECTS ABROAD_; a Popular Account of Foreign Insects, their
    Structure, Habits, and Transformations. With 600 Illustrations.
    8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _BIBLE ANIMALS_; a Description of every Living Creature
    mentioned in the Scriptures. With 112 Illustrations. 8vo.
    10_s._ 6_d._

    _STRANGE DWELLINGS_; a Description of the Habitations of
    Animals, abridged from ‘Homes without Hands.’ With 60
    Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 5_s._ Popular Edition, 4to. 6_d._

    _HORSE AND MAN_: their Mutual Dependence and Duties. With 49
    Illustrations. 8vo. 14_s._

    _ILLUSTRATED STABLE MAXIMS._ To be hung in Stables for the use
    of Grooms, Stablemen, and others who are in charge of Horses.
    On Sheet, 4_s._

    _OUT OF DOORS_; a Selection of Original Articles on Practical
    Natural History. With 11 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 5_s._

    _COMMON BRITISH INSECTS: BEETLES, MOTHS, AND BUTTERFLIES._ With
    130 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    _PETLAND REVISITED._ With 33 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7_s._
    6_d._

    The following books are extracted from other works by the Rev.
    J. G. WOOD (_see_ p. 21):

    _THE BRANCH BUILDERS._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2_s._
    6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _WILD ANIMALS OF THE BIBLE._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    3_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _DOMESTIC ANIMALS OF THE BIBLE._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
    3_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _BIRDS OF THE BIBLE._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._
    cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _WONDERFUL NESTS._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._
    cloth extra, gilt edges.

    _HOMES UNDERGROUND._ Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._
    cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Wood-Martin.=—_THE LAKE DWELLINGS OF IRELAND_: or Ancient Lacustrine
Habitations of Erin, commonly called Crannogs. By W. G. WOOD-MARTIN,
M.R.I.A. Lieut.-Colonel 8th Brigade North Irish Division, R.A. With 50
Plates. Royal 8vo. 25_s._

=Wright.=—_HIP DISEASE IN CHILDHOOD_, with Special Reference to its
Treatment by Excision. By G. A. WRIGHT, B.A. M.B.Oxon. F.R.C.S. Eng. With
48 Original Woodcuts. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Wylie.=—_HISTORY OF ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FOURTH._ By JAMES HAMILTON
WYLIE, M.A. one of Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools. (2 vols.) Vol. 1,
crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

=Wylie.=—_LABOUR, LEISURE, AND LUXURY_; a Contribution to Present
Practical Political Economy. By ALEXANDER WYLIE, of Glasgow. Crown 8vo.
1_s._

=Youatt.=—_WORKS BY WILLIAM YOUATT._

    _THE HORSE._ Revised and enlarged by W. WATSON, M.R.C.V.S. 8vo.
    Woodcuts, 7_s._ 6_d._

    _THE DOG._ Revised and enlarged. 8vo. Woodcuts. 6_s._

=Younghusband.=—_THE STORY OF OUR LORD, TOLD IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE FOR
CHILDREN._ By FRANCES YOUNGHUSBAND. With 25 Illustrations on Wood from
Pictures by the Old Masters, and numerous Ornamental Borders, Initial
Letters, &c. from Longmans’ Illustrated New Testament. Crown 8vo. 2_s._
6_d._ cloth plain; 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Zeller.=—_WORKS BY DR. E. ZELLER._

    _HISTORY OF ECLECTICISM IN GREEK PHILOSOPHY._ Translated by
    SARAH F. ALLEYNE. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _THE STOICS, EPICUREANS, AND SCEPTICS._ Translated by the Rev.
    O. J. REICHEL, M.A. Crown 8vo. 15_s._

    _SOCRATES AND THE SOCRATIC SCHOOLS._ Translated by the Rev. O.
    J. REICHEL, M.A. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

    _PLATO AND THE OLDER ACADEMY._ Translated by SARAH F. ALLEYNE
    and ALFRED GOODWIN, B.A. Crown 8vo. 18_s._

    _THE PRE-SOCRATIC SCHOOLS_; a History of Greek Philosophy from
    the Earliest Period to the time of Socrates. Translated by
    SARAH F. ALLEYNE. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 30_s._

    _OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY._ Translated by
    SARAH F. ALLEYNE and EVELYN ABBOTT. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._


TEXT-BOOKS OF SCIENCE.

_PHOTOGRAPHY._ By Captain W. DE WIVELESLIE ABNEY, F.R.S. late Instructor
in Chemistry and Photography at the School of Military Engineering,
Chatham. With 105 Woodcuts. 3_s._ 6_d._

_ON THE STRENGTH OF MATERIALS AND STRUCTURES_: the Strength of Materials
as depending on their quality and as ascertained by Testing Apparatus;
the Strength of Structures, as depending on their form and arrangement,
and on the materials of which they are composed. By Sir J. ANDERSON, C.E.
3_s._ 6_d._

_INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF ORGANIC CHEMISTRY_; the Chemistry of Carbon
and its Compounds. By HENRY E. ARMSTRONG, Ph.D. F.C.S. With 8 Woodcuts.
3_s._ 6_d._

_ELEMENTS OF ASTRONOMY._ By Sir R. S. BALL, LL.D. F.R.S. Andrews
Professor of Astronomy in the Univ. of Dublin, Royal Astronomer of
Ireland. With 136 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_RAILWAY APPLIANCES._ A Description of Details of Railway Construction
subsequent to the completion of Earthworks and Masonry, including a short
Notice of Railway Rolling Stock. By J. W. BARRY. With 207 Woodcuts. 3_s._
6_d._

_SYSTEMATIC MINERALOGY._ By HILARY BAUERMAN, F.G.S. Associate of the
Royal School of Mines. With 373 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_DESCRIPTIVE MINERALOGY._ By the same Author. With 236 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_METALS, THEIR PROPERTIES AND TREATMENT._ By C. L. BLOXAM and A. K.
HUNTINGTON, Professors in King’s College, London. With 130 Woodcuts. 5_s._

_PRACTICAL PHYSICS._ By R. T. GLAZEBROOK, M.A. F.R.S. and W. N. SHAW,
M.A. With 62 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_PHYSICAL OPTICS._ By R. T. GLAZEBROOK, M.A. F.R.S. Fellow and Lecturer
of Trin. Coll. Demonstrator of Physics at the Cavendish Laboratory,
Cambridge. With 183 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_THE ART OF ELECTRO-METALLURGY_, including all known Processes of
Electro-Deposition. By G. GORE, LL.D. F.R.S. With 56 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_ALGEBRA AND TRIGONOMETRY._ By the Rev. WILLIAM NATHANIEL GRIFFIN, B.D.
3_s._ 6_d._

_NOTES ON THE ELEMENTS OF ALGEBRA AND TRIGONOMETRY._ With Solutions of
the more difficult Questions. By the Rev. W. N. GRIFFIN, B.D. 3_s._ 6_d._

_THE STEAM ENGINE._ By GEORGE C. V. HOLMES, Whitworth Scholar; Secretary
of the Institution of Naval Architects. With 212 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM._ By FLEEMING JENKIN, F.R.SS. L. & E. late
Professor of Engineering in the University of Edinburgh. 3_s._ 6_d._

_THEORY OF HEAT._ By J. CLERK MAXWELL, M.A. LL.D. Edin. F.R.SS. L. & E.
With 41 Woodcuts. 3_s._ 6_d._

_TECHNICAL ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION._ By CHARLES W. MERRIFIELD, F.R.S.
3_s._ 6_d._

_KEY TO MERRIFIELD’S TEXT-BOOK OF TECHNICAL ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION._
By the Rev. JOHN HUNTER, M.A. formerly Vice-Principal of the National
Society’s Training College, Battersea. 3_s._ 6_d._

_INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF INORGANIC CHEMISTRY._ By WILLIAM ALLEN
MILLER, M.D. LL.D. F.R.S. With 71 Woodcuts. 3_s._ 6_d._

_TELEGRAPHY._ By W. H. PREECE, C.E. and J. SIVEWRIGHT, M.A. With 160
Woodcuts. 5_s._

_THE STUDY OF ROCKS_, an Elementary Text-Book of Petrology. By FRANK
RUTLEY, F.G.S. of Her Majesty’s Geological Survey. With 6 Plates and 88
Woodcuts. 4_s._ 6_d._

_WORKSHOP APPLIANCES_, including Descriptions of some of the Gauging and
Measuring Instruments—Hand Cutting Tools, Lathes, Drilling, Planing, and
other Machine Tools used by Engineers. By C. P. B. SHELLEY, M.I.C.E. With
292 Woodcuts. 4_s._ 6_d._

_STRUCTURAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL BOTANY._ By Dr. OTTO WILHELM THOMÉ,
Professor of Botany, School of Science and Art, Cologne. Translated by A.
W. BENNETT, M.A. B.Sc. F.L.S. With 600 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_QUANTITATIVE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS._ By T. E. THORPE, F.R.S.E. Ph.D.
Professor of Chemistry in the Andersonian University, Glasgow. With 88
Woodcuts. 4_s._ 6_d._

_MANUAL OF QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS AND LABORATORY PRACTICE._ By T. E.
THORPE, Ph.D. F.R.S.E. Professor of Chemistry in the Andersonian
University, Glasgow; and M. M. PATTISON MUIR. 3_s._ 6_d._

_INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF CHEMICAL PHILOSOPHY_; the Principles of
Theoretical and Systematical Chemistry. By WILLIAM A. TILDEN, B.Sc.
London, F.C.S. With 5 Woodcuts. 3_s._ 6_d._ With Answers to Problems,
4_s._ 6_d._

_ELEMENTS OF MACHINE DESIGN_; an Introduction to the Principles which
determine the Arrangement and Proportion of the Parts of Machines, and
a Collection of Rules for Machine Designs. By W. CAWTHORNE UNWIN, B.Sc.
Assoc. Inst. C.E. With 325 Woodcuts. 6_s._

_PLANE AND SOLID GEOMETRY._ By the Rev. H. W. WATSON, formerly Fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge. 3_s._ 6_d._


EPOCHS OF ANCIENT HISTORY.

Edited by the Rev. Sir G. W. COX, Bart. M.A. and by C. SANKEY, M.A. 10
Volumes, fcp. 8vo. with numerous Maps, Plans, and Tables, price 2_s._
6_d._ each volume.

_THE GRACCHI, MARIUS, AND SULLA._ By A. H. BEESLY, M.A.

_THE EARLY ROMAN EMPIRE._ From the Assassination of Julius Cæsar to the
Assassination of Domitian. By the Rev. W. WOLFE CAPES, M.A.

_THE ROMAN EMPIRE OF THE SECOND CENTURY, OR THE AGE OF THE ANTONINES._ By
the Rev. W. WOLFE CAPES, M.A.

_THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE._ From the Flight of Xerxes to the Fall of Athens.
By the Rev. Sir G. W. COX, Bart. M.A.

_THE GREEKS AND THE PERSIANS._ By the Rev. Sir G. W. COX, Bart. M.A.

_THE RISE OF THE MACEDONIAN EMPIRE._ By ARTHUR M. CURTEIS, M.A.

_ROME TO ITS CAPTURE BY THE GAULS._ By WILHELM IHNE.

_THE ROMAN TRIUMVIRATES._ By the Very Rev. CHARLES MERIVALE, D.D.

_THE SPARTAN AND THEBAN SUPREMACIES._ By CHARLES SANKEY, M.A.

_ROME AND CARTHAGE, THE PUNIC WARS._ By R. BOSWORTH SMITH, M.A.


EPOCHS OF MODERN HISTORY.

Edited by C. COLBECK, M.A. 18 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Maps, price 2_s._
6_d._ each volume.

_THE NORMANS IN EUROPE._ By Rev. A. H. JOHNSON, M.A.

_THE CRUSADES._ By the Rev. Sir G. W. COX, Bart. M.A.

_THE BEGINNING OF THE MIDDLE AGES._ By R. W. CHURCH, D.D. Dean of St.
Paul’s.

_THE EARLY PLANTAGENETS._ By W. STUBBS, D.D. Bishop of Chester.

_EDWARD THE THIRD._ By the Rev. W. WARBURTON, M.A.

_THE HOUSES OF LANCASTER AND YORK._ By JAMES GAIRDNER.

_THE EARLY TUDORS._ By the Rev. C. E. MOBERLY, M.A.

_THE ERA OF THE PROTESTANT REVOLUTION._ By F. SEEBOHM.

_THE FIRST TWO STUARTS AND THE PURITAN REVOLUTION, 1603-1660._ By SAMUEL
RAWSON GARDINER.

_THE AGE OF ELIZABETH._ By the Rev. M. CREIGHTON, M.A. LL.D.

_THE FALL OF THE STUARTS; AND WESTERN EUROPE FROM 1678 TO 1697._ By the
Rev. EDWARD HALE, M.A.

_THE AGE OF ANNE._ By E. E. MORRIS, M.A.

_THE THIRTY YEARS’ WAR, 1618-1648._ By SAMUEL RAWSON GARDINER.

_THE EARLY HANOVERIANS._ By E. E. MORRIS, M.A.

_FREDERICK THE GREAT AND THE SEVEN YEARS’ WAR._ By F. W. LONGMAN.

_THE WAR OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, 1775-1783._ By J. M. LUDLOW.

_THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, 1789-1795._ By Mrs. S. R. GARDINER.

_THE EPOCH OF REFORM, 1830-1850._ By JUSTIN M’CARTHY, M.P.


EPOCHS OF ENGLISH HISTORY.

Edited by the Rev. MANDELL CREIGHTON, M.A.

_EARLY ENGLAND TO THE NORMAN CONQUEST._ By F. YORK POWELL, M.A. 1_s._

_ENGLAND A CONTINENTAL POWER, 1066-1216._ By Mrs. MANDELL CREIGHTON. 9_d._

_RISE OF THE PEOPLE AND THE GROWTH OF PARLIAMENT, 1215-1485._ By JAMES
ROWLEY, M.A. 9_d._

_TUDORS AND THE REFORMATION, 1485-1603._ By the Rev. MANDELL CREIGHTON.
9_d._

_STRUGGLE AGAINST ABSOLUTE MONARCHY, 1603-1688._ By Mrs. S. R. GARDINER.
9_d._

_SETTLEMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION, FROM 1689 TO 1784._ By JAMES ROWLEY,
M.A. 9_d._

_ENGLAND DURING THE AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN WARS, FROM 1765 TO 1820._ By
the Rev. O. W. TANCOCK, M.A. 9_d._

_MODERN ENGLAND FROM 1820 TO 1874._ By OSCAR BROWNING, M.A. 9_d._

            ⁂ Complete in One Volume, with 27 Tables and
                Pedigrees, and 23 Maps. Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._

_THE SHILLING HISTORY OF ENGLAND; being an Introductory Volume to the
Series of ‘Epochs of English History.’_ By the Rev. MANDELL CREIGHTON,
M.A. Fcp. 8vo. 1_s._


EPOCHS OF CHURCH HISTORY.

Edited by the Rev. MANDELL CREIGHTON, M.A. Fcp. 8vo. price 2_s._ 6_d._
each volume.

_THE ENGLISH CHURCH IN OTHER LANDS; or, the Spiritual Expansion of
England._ By Rev. W. H. TUCKER, M.A.

_THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION IN ENGLAND._ By GEORGE G. PERRY, M.A.

_THE CHURCH OF THE EARLY FATHERS._ External History. By ALFRED PLUMMER,
M.A. D.D.

_THE EVANGELICAL REVIVAL IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY._ By the Rev. JOHN
HENRY OVERTON, M.A.

_THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD._ By the Hon. G. C. BRODRICK,
D.C.L.

_THE CHURCH AND THE ROMAN EMPIRE._ By the Rev. ARTHUR CARR, M.A.

                  ⁂ _Other Volumes in preparation._

        _Spottiswoode & Co. Printers, New-street Square, London._





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STRANGE CAREER OF THE CHEVALIER D'EON DE BEAUMONT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


