The Project Gutenberg eBook of Deirdre wed and other poems
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Deirdre wed and other poems

Author: Herbert Trench

Release date: March 4, 2025 [eBook #75529]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Methuen & Co, 1901

Credits: Richard Tonsing, Tim Lindell, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEIRDRE WED AND OTHER POEMS ***





                              DEIRDRE WED

                            AND OTHER POEMS




             WILT THOU ADVENTURE ON THE GULFS OF MORNING?
               COME, THEN, AND SUFFER THESE
             SELF-MUTTERING CITIES THAT HAVE LOST HORIZONS
               TO SINK BEHIND THE MOUNTAINS AND THE TREES.




                              DEIRDRE WED
                            AND OTHER POEMS


                                   BY

                             HERBERT TRENCH

[Illustration: [Logo]]

                             METHUEN & CO.
                        36 ESSEX STREET, STRAND
                                 LONDON
                                  1901




             _Copyrighted in the United States of America_




                                CONTENTS


 DEIRDRE WED—
                                                                    PAGE
    1. _The Chanters_                                                  3
    2. _Fintan_                                                        5
    3. _Cir_                                                          16
    4. _Urmael_                                                       31
    5. _Fintan_                                                       53
 Ode on a Silver Birch                                                59
 A Charge                                                             64
 Song for the Funeral of a Boy                                        66
 Come, let us make love deathless                                     69
 Claviers at Night                                                    70
 The Man Digging                                                      75
 Schiehallion                                                         76
 The Shell                                                            78
 The Rock of Cloud                                                    79
 She comes not when Noon is on the roses                              85
 The Night                                                            86
 Maurya’s Song                                                        88
 Tired with the day’s monotony                                        90
 You were stay’d in heart on heaven                                   91
 The Bloom                                                            92
 In the Roman Amphitheatre, Verona                                    94
 A Winter Song                                                        95
 The Nutter                                                           97
 Shakespeare                                                         101

 Notes                                                               104




                              DEIRDRE WED


                                   I
                              THE CHANTERS

                          I
      _I stood on the Hill of Time when the sun was fled
      And my vision sought where to rest, till it knew the plains
      Of my country, the Night’s harp, and the moonless bed
      Of rivers and bristling forests and sea-board chains._


                          II

      _And from many a chanter’s mound—none is nameless there—
      Could I hear, amid rumour eternal, the voice ascend:
      With the bones of man endureth his floating hair
      And the song of his spirit on earth is slow to end._


                          III

      _Speak to me, speak to me, Fintan, dark in the south,
      From the west Urmael, and Cir, lying under the pole,
      Some chant that ye made, who never spake mouth to mouth,
      But over the ridge of ages from soul to soul._


                          IV

      _And a strain came out of Dun Tulcha, the yews’ shores,
      From Fintan, the elder than yews, the too old for tears,
      “Let us tell him of Deirdre wed, that his heart’s doors
      Resound, as when kings arrive, with the trees of spears.”_


                                   II
              VOICE OF FINTAN _out of the First Century_,

        O Sightless and rare-singing brotherhood!
        It was the night of marriage. Word had sped,
        Tokens gone out to every rath and ring
        And every pasture on the woody knolls
        Green about Eman, of the slaughter blithe
        Of sheep and boar, of badger and of stag,
        Reddening the ways up to the kingly house—
        Of sheep and goats and of the stintless food
        That should be poured out to his beggary
        By Connachar, that all time should remember
        The night he wed the girl from the elf-mound.
        Yonside of Assaroe the swineherd found her
        Bred in a peaty hillock of the west
        By some old crone. Though tribeless she and wild—
        Barefoot, and in the red wool chasing cattle—
        Connachar saw and took, biding his time,
        And let queens give her skill the winter long
        In webs and brews and dyes and broideries
        Up to this night of marriage.

                                          Fabulous,
        O friends, and dark, and mighty, was his house,
        The beam-work in its dome of forest trunks—
        They that had been the chantries of the dawn
        To blacken songless through a thousand years:—
        But never since they sway’d buds in the glens
        Or spun the silken-floating violet gleam
        Had those spars groan’d above so fierce a breath
        Rich with the vapour of the boar. For now
        Hundreds with ruddy-glistening faces ran
        Jostling round the nine shadows of the blaze
        And spread with skins the lengthy beds of men
        And soused warm spice of herbs in ale. Here—thither—
        Was rousing of age-slumber’d horns, arranging
        Smooth banks throughout the house, strawing of rushes,
        And cauldrons humm’d before the empty throne
        Set high in the shadow of the wall, and bubbled
        Inaudible, impatient for the king.

        But while outside the black roof on the mount
        Outwafted was the gold divinity
        On swooning wings, the Lake of Pearls far down
        Curdled beneath the unseen seed of rain.
        Ramparts run there that misty prisoners
        Bore once in bags of slime up from the lake
        For barriers of the house they most abhorr’d.
        And on the hill-side, where that rampart old
        Dips lowest to the lakeward, Deirdre stood,
        Hearing from distant ridges the faint bleat
        Of lambs perturb the dusk—bleats shivering out
        Like wool from thorns—there the young Deirdre stood,
        Even she whose climbing beauty pales the world,
        Looking far off on hills whence she was come.
        Mountains that lift the holiness of Fire!
        Fortitudes, ye that take the brunt of fate!
        Send her across the bog a little cloud
        Full of the ancient savours, full of peace,
        And for its drops she will hold up her heart,
        O ye that stand in heaven, far removed!
        She ask’d aloud, Wherefore were greens so bare
        That but an hour ago shook with the thud
        Of racers and of hurlers? Was it late?
        The wrinkled nurse replied, Had the child eyes?
        Back from a hosting and a desperate prey
        For corn and mares and rustless brass and beeves
        Naois, with the rest of Usnach’s sons,
        Had come. She had seen him weary go but now
        Heavily up the steep through the king’s hedge.
        Now on the hill-top while the woman spoke
        So chanced it. Hanging on the young man’s lips
        The hosts sway’d round him, and above the press
        Connachar, glittering all in torques of gold
        And writhen armlets, listen’d from the mound
        Of judgment, by the doom-oak at his door.
        His beak’d helm took the sunset, but he held
        His flint-red eyes in shadow and averse.
        And when before him, dark as a young pine,
        Unmoved the son of Usnach had told all;
        How half his folk had perish’d in the task
        By plague or battle, and how poor a spoil
        Was driven home, the king cried, Paragon!
        We must go griddle cakes in honey for him,
        Bring lavers of pale gold to wash off blood
        So precious to us; since for many moons
        This champion had forsworn the face of softness
        And stretch’d his hungers to the sleety rock,
        Call in the smile of women to unlatch
        From his grim ribs the iron:—Faugh! Away!
        Let Usnach’s sons take out again that night
        Their broken clans, their piteous cattle thence;
        Defeated men should see his gates no more.

        The son of Usnach turn’d and went. He ran
        Down hill and to the loch to wash his wounds
        Chanting—his dark curls waver’d in the wind—
        Chanting he strode, tossing a brace of spears,
        Lest we should think him humbled. Half-way down
        The shapes of women loiter’d in the dusk
        And one held backward out her arms to take
        The latchets of a cloak. But as Naois
        Pass’d by them, closely as is heard a sigh—
        His vehement flood of soul fierce for the mere—
        Glancing not right nor left, O then I saw
        The foot of Deirdre stricken motionless—
        I saw the stiff cloak many-colour’d sink
        Slow to the grass, wrinkling its blazon’d skins
        Behind her.

                    Gloom suck’d in the banqueters;
        And from the warmth of drinking at his feast
        Connachar sent forth to the women’s house;
        And heralds bade bring also the gray seer
        Cathva, though Cathva had not will’d to come.
        But hardly had those erranders gone out
        When rose the door-hide: the gray seer came in
        Noiseless. He was of fog the night hath spun,
        Earth in his hair and on his meagre cheek,
        Consumed and shaking, ragged as seaweed,
        And to the throne he cried: “Why hast thou called
        Me to carousal? Is this bed my work?
        Nay—too great clearness underneath the thunder
        Shew’d insupportably the things to be.
        Too long have I, with glamours, drops and runes,
        Shook round her cabin low my skirts of storm
        To shield thee from that devastating face.
        My fault is only that I slew her not.
        Know! it was I that, seeing those cradled limbs
        Bright with disaster for the realm and thee,
        Flung her away among sea-warding mountains.
        But Muilréa to Ben Gorm said: _What is this?
        What glee is this disturbs our desolation?
        I hear another than the wild duck sheering
        Sidelong the wind. Tall as a rush is she,
        Sweet as the glitter of the netted lakes!_
        And Ben Gorm answer’d: _We are sick alone:
        Let us distil the heavens into a child:
        Yea, let our bones appear, the black goat starve
        Upon our heads, yet shall this wafted seed
        Superabound with ripeness we forego.
        Dark space shall come to heart—silver of mists—
        And thou, blue depth of gorges!_ Connachar,
        I heard the plotters, but I let her live.”
        And the king ask’d: “Hath any seen her there?”
        And Cathva answer’d, “Till thy servant found her
        She knew not that men were.” Then Connachar
        Commanded yet again: “Bring us in Deirdre.”
        Straightway a woman like the claw of birds,
        Decrepit, bright of eye, and innocent,
        Stood up beyond the fire. Her fingers play’d—
        Play’d with a red stone at her breast. He ask’d
        “Who gave thee, hag, the jewel of thy bosom?”
        Now every drinker from the darkest stalls
        Perceived the brooch was Deirdre’s, and a gift
        To her from Connachar. Aghast, the woman
        Fumbled at her sere breast, and wept and said:
        “It was a gift to me, O Connachar,
        This night.” And he, consummate lord of fear,
        Our never-counsell’d lord, the Forest-odour’d,
        That kept about his heart a zone of chill,
        Smiled, though within the gateway of his fort
        A surmise crept, as ’neath a load of rushes
        Creeps in the stabber. “Fix the pin, Levarcham,
        For she that loses such a brooch will grieve.
        Why comes not Deirdre?” “Sir, she is not yet
        Duly array’d, and so is loth to come.”
        O, then, believe me, all the floor was hush,
        But a mad discordancy like fifes, drums, brasses,—
        Bondmen of old wars on the winds released—
        Shook every beam and pillar of the house;
        And the king said—“Thou hear’st out of the marsh
        Scream of my stallions mounting on the gale?”
        And she said “Yea.” “Thou knowest round these walls
        How many chariots now are tilted up?”
        And she said “Yea.” “Then, woman, bring with haste
        Deirdre, thy charge, into this presence now
        Or limb from limb upon the pleasant grass
        Those wheels shall parcel thee at dawn.” And she
        Lifted her hands and closed her eyes and sang,
        “She will come back, but I, I shall not bring her!
        O rainbow breathed into the dreadful pine,
        Why art thou gone from me? Dearer to me
        Than the sobbing of the cuckoo to the shore
        Why art thou gone from me?” She bow’d and wept.
        And Connachar came from the throne, and grasping
        As if he felt no heat, the cauldron’s brims
        Lean’d through its steams, watching the nurse and said,
        “Will these afflicting tears bring Deirdre in?”
        But she look’d up and said: “How shall I bring her?
        Look now outside thy door, O Connachar!
        The black oak with the vision-dripping boughs
        Whose foot is in thy fathers’ blood of pride
        Stagger’d as I came up in the night-blast.
        In vain it stretches angers to the sky:
        It cannot keep the white moon from escape
        To sail the tempest; nor, O king, canst thou!”
        The cheek of him that listen’d grew thrice-pale
        And his thick nostrils swell’d, his half-shut eyes
        Fang’d sheen, and slow dilated; stubbornly
        He clutch’d to steady his convulsive frame
        The sea-full cauldron; quick, with efforts vast,
        Upheaved and swung and pillar’d it on high—
        And hoarsely bade “Take torches.” Every man
        Kindled in silence at the hearth divine.
        Then Connachar pour’d out upon the blaze
        The flood within the vat. The roofs were fill’d
        With darkness foul, with hissings and with smoke....


                                  III
      VOICE OF CIR _out of a Century more remote_, _but unknown_,

 As a horseman breaks on a sea-gulf enwomb’d in the amber woods
 Where tide is at ebb, and out on the airy brim
 Glass’d upon cloud and azure stand multitudes
 Of the flame-white people of gulls—to the sky-line dim

 All breast to the sun,—and his hoofs expand the desolate strait
 Into fevers of snows and ocean-wandering cries:
 Even so, chanters divine, in some woman’s fate
 At coming of him to be loved do her dreams arise.

 And Deirdre the exquisite virgin pale as the coat of swans
 Took the flame of love in her heart at the time of dew

 And clad her in ragged wool from a coffer of bronze
 And walked in the chill of night, for her soul was new.

 “Why thick with the berries of sweetness, ye barren thorns of the
    spring?
 I could drink up this tempest cold as a burning wine.
 Why laugh, my grief, for art thou not bride of a king,
 And the drinkers drink to a couch array’d to be thine?”

 Where the wounded toss without sleep in the warrior’s hive of stones—
 The house Bron Bhearg—she laid her cheek to the wall
 And bless’d them by stealth, with no pang at the sound of groans
 Having that in her rich heart which could heal them all.

 To the fortress-gate on the steep that looketh toward Creeve Roe
 She fled, and spied not a sling-cast off the flare
 Of a torch, and the skull fixed over the gate. And lo,
 To the right hand watchmen paced by the water there.

 And the shag-hair’d guard, with a mock, laid spears in their passage
    house
 Athwart, for who was this phantom over the grass
 Like a filcher of food? And Deirdre uncover’d her brows
 And cried: “I am Deirdre!” And sullen they gave her the pass.

 And towards Creeve Roe the dip of the cuckoo’s vale was dark
 To blindness. She pluck’d her steps on that miry road
 Through copses alive with storm, till at length a spark
 Shew’d the forge where the smith on the heroes’ way abode.

 Now Culann the smith was wise; and leaping her spirit stirr’d
 With the soft roar of his hide-wing’d fire as it soar’d:
 “Has the son of Usnach pass’d?” “Yea, gone back!” With the word
 He smote on a ribbon of iron to make him a sword.

 And the argentine din of anvils behind her steadily dwindling
 The woman fled to the wastes, till she came to a Thorn
 Black, by the well of a God, with stars therein kindling
 And over it rags fluttering from boughs forlorn.

 And she knelt and shore with a knife a lock of her deathless hair,
 And leash’d the black-shuddering branch with that tress, and pray’d:
 “Sloe-tree, thou snow of the darkness, O hear my prayer,
 And thou, black Depth, bubble-breather, vouchsafe thine aid;

 “From Connachar’s eyes of love let me hide as a gray mole,
 Sons of the earth’s profound, that no weeper spurn!
 I have look’d on a face, and its kindness ravish’t my soul
 But deliverance pass’d; unto you for escape I turn.”

 And loud as the sloven starlings in winter whistle and swarm
 Came the banish’d of Usnach nigh, thrice fifty strong
 As they drove from Eman away on that night of storm
 And Naois spoke with his brothers behind the throng:

 “O, Aillean, O, Ardan, hark! What cry was that? For some cry
 Rang on my soul’s shield; hark! hear ye it now?”
 But they rein’d not their weary chariots, shouting reply
 “It was fate,’twas the curs’t hag that is crouch’d on a bough!”

 Tossing they drove out of sight, Naois the last, and his hood
 Rain-dripping mantled the wind. One ran like a roe,
 And call’d on that great name from the nightbound wood,
 “Stay, long-awaited, stay! for with thee I go!”

 And his brothers cried “Halt not! the host of the air makes moan
 Or a gang of the wild geese going back to the lake.”
 But Naois rear’d up the deep-ribb’d Srōn, “Good Srōn,
 Thou and I needs must turn for our fame’s sake.”

 And he heard a voice: “Son of Usnach, take me to be thy wife!”
 He bent from the withers, the blaze of her trembling drew
 The breath from his lips and the beat from his heart’s life;
 And he said, “Who art thou, Queen?” But himself knew,

 And mutter’d “Return, return, unto him that I hate. For know
 Him least of all I rob, least of all that live.”
 But she cried: “Am I then a colt, that ye snare from a foe
 With a bridle’s shaking? I am mine own to give.”

 “Thy beauty would crumble away in the spate of my wild nights,
 And famine rake out thine embers, the lean paw
 Of jeopardy find thee. He is not rich in delights
 Whose harp is the gray fell in the winter’s flaw.”

 And she laid her arm round the neck of Srōn: “Hast heard,
 Horse swollen-vein’d from battle, insulter of death—
 Whose back is only a perch for the desert bird—
 Whose fore-hooves fight—whose passage is torn with teeth,

 “And dost thou not shudder off the knees of a master deaf
 To the grief of the weak?” And the lad, deeply-moved, rejoins
 “Mount then, O woman, behind me,”—and light as a leaf
 Drawing her up from his foot to the smoking loins

 Shook loose the ox-hide bridle. Even as the great gull dives
 From Muilréa’s moon-glittering peak when the sky is bare,
 Scraped naked by nine days’ wind, and sweepingly drives
 Overnight-blurr’d gulfs and the long glens of the air,

 And feels up-tossing his breast an exhaustless breath bear on
 Spouted from isleless ocean to aid his flight—
 So fiercely, so steadily gallop’d the sinewy Srōn,
 Braced by that double burden to more delight.

 Though his mane wrapp’d a wounded bridle-hand, fast, fast
 As giddy foam-weltering waters dash’d by the hoof
 Flee away from the weirs of Callan, even so pass’d
 Dark plains away to the world’s edge, behind and aloof.

 And the rider stoop’d and whisper’d amidst the thunder of weirs
 Such sweetness of praise to his horse in the swirl of the flood
 That Srōn twitch’d back for an instant his moonëd ears—
 Strain’d forth like a hare’s,—as his haunches up to the wood

 Wrested them. Beaks of magic, the wreckage of time, came out
 And talon’d things of the forest would waft and sway
 But Naois raised unforgotten that battle-shout
 That scatters the thrilling wreath of all fears away.

 So they measured the Plain of the Dreamers, the Brake of the Black Ram,
 Till the Crag of the Dances before them did shape and loom.
 And the Meads of the Faery Hurlers in silver swam
 Then up to the Gap of the Winds, and the far-seen tomb

 White on Slieve Fuad’s side. By many a marchland old
 And cairn of princes—yea, to mine own bedside—
 They adventured. Think ye, sweet bards, that I could lie cold
 When my chamber of rock fore-knew that impassion’d stride?

 Had I, too, not pluck’d the webs of rain-sweet drops from the harp
 And torn from its wave of chords an imperishable love
 To sleep on this breast? Here, through the mountain sharp
 My grave-chamber tunnell’d is, and one door from above

 Westward surveys green territories, gentle with flowers and charm,
 But forth from the eastern face of the ridge is unquell’d
 Wilderness, besown with boulders and grass of harm.
 And even in my trance could I feel those riders approach and beheld

 Naois assault the ridge, to the wilderness setting his face
 Expectant, unconscious, as one whom his foes arouse;
 His heart was a forge—his onset enkindled space—
 He shook off the gusty leagues like locks from his brows.

 What should he reck of Earth save that under his wounds he felt
 Stolen round him, as dreamy water steals round a shore,
 A girdle, the arms of Deirdre, clasp’d for a belt
 That terror of main kings should unlock no more?

 I was caught from the grave’s high gate as that spume-flaked ecstacy
    drew
 Upward, and wing’d like the kiss of Aengus, strove
 For utterance to greet them—encircling their heads that flew—
 But who loops the whirlwind’s foot or out-dreameth love?

 He wheel’d round Srōn on the crest. Abrupt he flung back a hand
 And spoke, “Dost thou know the truth? Look where night is low!
 Soon the ants of that mound shall shake the ledge where we stand:
 Now the tribes are summon’d, the Night prepares his blow.

 “Now wrath spurts, hot from the trumpet—the main beacon flares—
 Now tackle the arrogant chariots—dogs in their glee
 Hang on the leash-slaves, numb in the cockcrow airs.
 Why, out of all that host, hast thou singled me?”

 I heard her behind him breathe, “Because out of all that host
 Aptest art thou in feats, held in honour more
 Than any save bright Cuchullain.”[1] He turn’d as one lost,
 “Is this time a time to mock? Are there not fourscore

 “Better at feats than I, my masters, the noble teams,
 The attemper’d knights of the Red Branch every one?
 Nay, though I knead up the whole earth in my dreams,
 Nought to such men am I, who have nothing done.”

 I heard the blowings of Srōn, and then lasting words: “I choose
 Thee—wherefore? Ah, how interpret? To-day on the slope
 Where first by the wall I saw thee at gloam of dews
 I knew it was fated. It was not some leaf of hope

 Eddying. Thou wast the token—half of the potter’s shard—
 That a chief beleaguer’d cons in his desperate camp
 Pass’d in by some hand unseen to the outmost guard,
 And fits to the other half by his wasted lamp.

 “Seeing thee, I knew myself to be shaped of the self-same clay—
 Half of the symbol—and broken, mayhap, to serve
 As language to them of the night from powers of the day.”
 By the Path of the throbbing Curlew no step may swerve

 Where they rode through the Gap; and at last she murmur’d, “Dost grieve
    at me still?”
 And he said, “Glorious is it to me that behind us pursuit
 Shall be wide as the red of the morning, for thou art my will!
 To the beach of the world of the dead, and beyond it to boot,

 “Let me take and defend thee.” In silence the hearts of the twain were
    screen’d,—
 But crossing the mires and the torrents I saw strange ease
 Afloat, like a spark, on the woman’s eyes as she lean’d
 Forth, and a shadow betwixt her lips like peace.

Footnote 1:

  Pronounced Cuhoollin.


                                   IV
               VOICE OF URMAEL _out of the Sixth Century_

      The slender Hazels ask’d the Yew like night
        Beside the river-green of Lisnacaun
      “Who is this woman beautiful as light
        Sitting in dolour on thy branchéd lawn;
      With sun-red hair, entangled as with flight,
        Sheening the knees up to her bosom drawn?
      What horses mud-besprent so thirstily
      Bellying the hush pools with their nostrils wide?”
      And the Yew old as the long mountain-side
      Answer’d, “I saw her hither with Clan Usnach ride.”

      “Come, love, and climb with me Findruim’s woods
        Alone,” Naois pray’d. Through broom and bent
      Strown with swift-travelling shadows of their moods,
        Leaving below the camp’s thin cries, they went.
      And never a tress, escaping from her snoods,
        Made the brown river with a kiss content,
      So safe he raised up Deirdre through the ford.
      Thanks, piteous Gods, that no fore-boding gave,
      He should so bear her after to the grave,
      Breasting the druid ice, breasting the phantom wave.

      “O, bear me on,” she breathed, “for ever so!”
        And light as notes the Achill shepherd plays
      On his twin pipes they wanton’d, light and slow,
        Up the broad valley. Birds sail’d from the haze
      Far up, where darkling copses over-grow
        Scarps of the gray cliff from his river’d base.
      Diaphaneity, the spirit’s beauty,
      Along the dimnéd coombes did float and reign,
      And many a mountain’s scarry flank was plain
      Through nets of youngling gold betrimm’d with rain.

      But when an upward space of grass—so free—
        So endless—beckon’d to the realms of wind
      Deirdre broke from his side, and airily
        Fled up the slopes, flinging disdains behind,
      And paused, and round a little vivid tree
        The wolf-skins from her neck began to bind.
      Naois watch’d below this incantation;
      Then upward on his javelin’s length he swung
      To catch some old crone’s ditty freshly sung,
      Bidding that shoot be wise, for yet ’twas young.

      With gaze in gaze, thus ever up and on
        Roved they unwitting of the world out-roll’d,
      Their ears dinn’d by the breeze’s clarion
        That quicks the blood while yet the cheek is cold;
      Great whitenesses rose past them—brooks ran down—
        And step by step Findruim bare and bold
      Uplifted. So a swimmer is uplifted
      Horsed on a streaming shoulder of the Sea—
      Our hasty master, who to such as we
      Tosses some glittering hour of mastery.

      They heard out of the zenith swoop and sting
        Feathery voices, keen and soft and light:
      “_Mate ye as eagles mate, that on the wing
        Grapple—heaven-high—hell-deep, for yours is flight!
      Souls like the granite candles of a king
        Flaming unshook amid the noise of night
      What of pursuit, that you to-day shouldst fear it?_”
      Pursuit they reck’d not, save of wind that pours
      Surging and urging on to other shores
      Over the restless forest of a thousand doors.

      “Deirdre,” he cried, “the blowing of thy hair
        Is of the clouds that everlasting stream
      Forth from the castles of those islands rare
        Black in the ragged-misted ocean’s gleam
      And glimpsed by Iceland galleys as they fare
        Northward!” But in her bosom’s open seam
      She set the powder’d yew-sprig silently;
      “Speak not of me nor give my beauty praise,
      Whose beauty is to follow in thy ways
      So that my days be number’d with thy days.”

      In the high pastures of that boundless place
        Their feet wist not if they should soar or run
      They turned, at earth astonish’d, face to face
        Deeming unearthly blessedness begun.
      And slow, mid nests of running larks, they pace
        Drinking from the recesses of the sun
      Tremble of those wings that beat light into music.
      There the world’s ends lay open: open wide
      The body’s windows. What shall them divide
      Who have walk’d once that country side by side?

      She mused, “O why doth happiness too much
        Fountains of blood and spirit seem to fill?
      The woods, over-flowing, cannot bear that such
        An hour should be so sweet and yet be still:
      Even the low-tangled bushes at a touch
        Break into wars of gleemen, thrill on thrill.
      O son of Usnach, bring me not thy glories!
      Bring me defeats and shames and secret woe;
      That where no brother goeth I may go
      And kneel to wash thy wounds in caverns bleak and low!”

      “Here, up in sight of the far shine of sea,
        (He sang) once after hunting, by the fire
      I knelt, and kindling brushwood raised up thee,
        Deirdre, nor wist the star of my desire
      Should ever walk Findruim’s head with me
        Far from a king’s loud house and soft attire.
      Fain would I thatch us here a booth of hazels,
      Thatch it with drift and snow of sea-gulls’ wings:
      And thy horn’d harp should wonder to its strings
      _What spoil is it to-night Naois brings?_”

      “Listen,” quoth he, when scarce those words were gone
        (A neck of the bare down it was, a ledge
      Of wind-sleek turf, the lovers roam’d upon
        And sent young rabbits scuttling to the edge
      Of underwoods beneath) “I think that yon
        Some beast—haply a stag—takes harbourage.”
      And Deirdre at a word come back from regions
      Of bliss too close to pain, snatch’d with no fear
      Out of his hand the battle-haunted spear
      And, questing swiftly down the pasture sheer,

      Enter’d the yew’s black vault: therein profound
      Green-litten air, and there as seeking fresh
      Enemies, one haunch crush’d against the ground
        The grey boar slew’d, tusking the tender flesh
      Of shoots, his ravage-whetted bulk around:
        But when his ear across the straggling mesh
      Of feather’d sticks report of Deirdre found
      He quiver’d, snorted; from his jaws like wine
      Foam dripp’d; along the horror of his spine
      The bristles grew up like a ridge of pine.

      Mortals, the maiden deem’d that guise a mask—
        Believed that in that beast sate to ensnare
      He of the red eye—little need to ask
        The druid-wrinkled hide, the sluttish hair:
      This was to escape—how vain poor passion’s task!—
        Connachar of the illimitable lair!
      He crash’d at her; she heaved the point embrown’d
      In blood of dragons. Heavily the boar
      Grazed by the iron, reel’d, leapt, charged once more
      And thrice in passage her frail vesture tore.

      As when a herd-boy lying on the scar
        (Who pipes to flocks below him on the steep
      Melodies like their neckbells, scattering far,
        Cool as the running water, soft as sleep)
      Hurls out a flint from peril to debar
        And from the boulder’d chasm recall his sheep—
      So with a knife Naois leapt and struck.
      Strange, in the very fury of a stride
      The grey beast like a phantom from his side
      Plunged without scathe to thickets undescried.

      Naois sheathed his iron with no stain
        And laugh’d “This shall be praised in revels mad
      Around Lug’s peak, when women scatter grain
        Upon the warriors. Why shouldst thou be sad
      Pale victory?” But she, “Ah, thus again
        Ere night do I imperil thee, and add
      Burden to burden.” And he strove to lead her
      From grief, and said “What, bride! thy raiment torn?”
      “Content thee, O content thee, man of scorn,
      I’ll brooch it with no jewel but a thorn!”

      They seek down through the Wood of Awe that hems
        Findruim, like the throng about his grave,
      Dusk with the swarth locks of ten thousand stems
        In naked poise. These make no rustle save
      Some pine-cone dropt, or murmur that condemns
        Murmur; bedumb’d with moss that giant nave.
      But let Findruim shake out overhead
      His old sea-sigh, and when it doth arrive
      At once their tawny boles become alive
      With flames that come and go, and they revive

      The north’s Fomorian roar.—“I am enthrall’d,”
        He said, “as by the blueness of a ray
      That, dropping through this presence sombre-wall’d
        Burns low about the image of a spray—
      Of some poor beech-spray witch’d to emerald.
        Wilt thou not dance, daughter of heaven, to-day
      Free, at last free? For here no moody raindrop
      Can reach thee, nor betrayer overpeer;
      And none the self-delightful measure hear
      That thy soul moves to, quit of mortal ear.”

      Full loth she pleads, yet cannot him resist
        And on the enmosséd lights begins to dance.
      Away, away, far-floating like a mist,
        To fade into some leafy brilliance;
      Then, smiling to the inward melodist,
        Over the printless turf with slow advance
      Of showery footsteps, makes she infinite
      That crowded glen. But quick, possess’d by strange
      Rapture, wider than dreams her motions range
      Till to a span the forests shrink and change.

      And in her eyes and glimmering arms she brings
        Hither all promise,—all the unlook’d-for boon
      Of rain-bow’d life—all rare and speechless things
        That shine and swell under the brimming Moon.
      Who shall pluck tympans? For what need of strings
        To waft her blood who is herself the tune—
      Herself the warm and breathing melody?
      Art come from the Land of the Ever-Young? O stay!
      For his heart, after thee rising away,
      Falls dark and spirit-faint back to the clay.

      Griefs, like the yellow leaves by winter curl’d,
        Rise after her—long-buried pangs arouse—
      About that bosom the grey forests whirl’d,
        And tempests with her beauty might espouse,—
      She rose with the green waters of the world
        And the winds heaved with her their depth of boughs.
      Then vague again as blows the beanfield’s odour
      On the dark lap of air she chose to sink,
      As, winnowing with plumes, to the river-brink
      The pigeons from the cliff come down to drink.

      Sudden distraught, shading her eyes, she ceased,
        Listening, like bride whom cunning faery strain
      Forth from the trumpet-bruited spousal feast
        Steals. But she beckon’d soon, and quick with pain
      He ran, he craved at those white feet the least
        Pardon; nor, till he felt her hand again
      Descend flake-soft, durst spy that she was weeping
      Or kneel with burning murmurs to atone.
      For sleep she wept. Long fasting had they gone
      And ridden from the breaking of the dawn.

      It chanced that waters, nigh to that selve grove,
        From Sleep’s own lake as from a cauldron pass;
      He led towards their sound his weary love
        And lay before her in the fresh of grass
      Resting—the white cirque of the cliffs above—
        Against a sun-abandon’d stem there was.
      Spray from the strings of water spilling over
      The weir of rock, their fever’d cheeks bewet;
      And to its sound a voiceless bread they ate,
      And drank the troth that is unbroken yet.

      Out in the mere—brown—unbesilver’d now
        By finest skimming of the elfin breeze—
      An isle was moor’d, with rushes at its prow
        And fraught with haze of deeply-mirror’d trees;
      And knowing Deirdre still was mindful how
        The boar yet lived, that she might sleep at ease
      Naois swore to harbour on that islet.
      Nine strides he waded in, on footings nine
      Deep, deeper yet, until his basnet’s shine
      Sank to the cold lips of the lake divine.

      Divine; for once the sunk stones of that way
        Approach’d the pool-god, and the outermost
      Had been the black slab whereon druids slay
        With stoop and mutter to the water’s ghost,
      Though since to glut some whim malign the fay
        Had swell’d over the flags. Of all the host
      Few save Naois, and at sore adventure
      Had ta’en this pass. But who would not have press’d
      Through straits by the chill-finger’d fiend possess’d
      To bear unto that isle Deirdre to rest?

      “Seal up thy sight; my shield of iron rims
        Unhook; cast in this shatter’d helm for spoil.”
      ’Twas done, and then with rush of cleaving limbs
        He swam and bore her out with happy toil
      Secret and fierce as the flat otter swims
        Out of the whistling reeds as if through oil.
      And Deirdre, whiter than the wave-swan floating,
      Smiled that he suffer’d her no stroke to urge.
      At length they reach the gnarl’d and ivied verge
      And from the shallows to the sun emerge.

      She spreads her wolf-skins on the rock that glows
        And sun-tears wrings out of the heavy strands
      Of corded hair. He, watching to the close,
        Sees not the white silk tissue as she stands
      Clinging bedull’d to the clear limbs of rose.
        She turn’d and to him stretch’d misdoubting hands:
      “Tell me, ere thou dissolve, O wordless watcher,
      Am I that Deirdre that would sit and spin
      Beside Keshcorran? Dost thou love me? Then
      I touch thee. For I, too, have love within.”

      O sacred cry! Again, again the first
        Love-cry! How the steep woods thirst for thy voice,
      O never-dying one! That voice, like the outburst
        And gush of a young spring’s delicious noise
      Driven from the ancient heights whereon ’twas nursed!
        Yet, as death’s heart is silent, so is joy’s.
      His mouth spake not; for, as in dusk Glen Treithim
      Smelters of bubbling gold brook not to breathe
      Reek of the colour’d fumes whose hissings wreathe
      The brim, he choked at his own spirit’s seethe.

      Sternly he looked on her and strangely said
        “What touch is thine? It hath unearthly powers.
      I think thou art the woman Cairbre made
        Out of the dazzle and the wind of flowers.
      Behold, the flame-like children of the shade,
        The buds, about thee rise like servitors!
      It seems I had not lipp’d the cup of living
      Till thou didst stretch it out. Vaguely I felt
      Irreparable waste. Why hast thou dwell’d
      Near me on earth so long, yet unbeheld?”

      Chanters! The Night brings nigh the deeps far off,
        But Twilight shows the distance of the Near;
      And with a million dawns that pierce above
        Mixes the soul of suns that disappear,
      To make man’s eyes approach the eyes of love
        In simpleness, in mystery and fear.
      All blooms both bright and pale are in her gardens,
      All chords both shrill and deep under her hand
      Who, sounding forth the richness of the land,
      Estrangeth all, that we may understand.

      So still it was, they heard in the evening skies
        Creak as of eagles’ wing-feathers afar
      Coasting the grey cliffs. On him slowly rise,
        As to Cuchullain came his signal star,
      Out of the sheeted rivers, Deirdre’s eyes.
        And who look’d in them well was girt for war;
      Seeing in that gaze all who for love had perish’d:
      The queens calamitous unbow’d at last—
      The supreme fighters that alone stood fast—
      Fealties obscure, unwitness’d, and long past,

      Cloud over cloud—the host that had attain’d
        By love,—in very essence, force, heat, breath
      Now, now arose in Deirdre’s eyes and deign’d
        Summons to him—“_Canst follow us?_” it saith—
      Till from that great contagion he hath gain’d
        An outlook like to conquest over death.
      Then he discerns the solemn-rafter’d world
      By this frail brazier’s glowings, wherein blend
      Coals that no man hath kindled, without end
      Born and re-born, from ashes to ascend.

      And face to face to him unbared she cleaves
        Woman no more—scarce-breathing—infinite,
      Grave as the fair-brow’d priestess Earth receives
        In all her lochs and plains and invers bright
      And shores wide-trembling where one image heaves,
        Him that is lord of silence and of light.
      Slow the God sigh’d himself from rocks and waters
      But in his soft withdrawals from the air
      No creature in the weightless world was there
      Uttered its being’s secret round the pair.

      Ah! them had Passion’s self-enshrouding arm
        Taken, as a green fury of ocean takes,
      Through the dense thickets smitten with alarm
        To the islet’s trancéd core. And Deirdre wakes,
      Lifting hot lids that shut against the storm,
        Lying on a hillock, amid slender brakes
      Of grey trees, to the babble of enchantments
      From mouths of chill-born flowers. The place was new
      To rapture. Branchéd sunbursts plashing through
      After, had laid the mound with fire and dew.

      Naois cuts down osiers. Now he seeks
        A narrow grass-plot shorn as if with scythe
      And over two great boulders’ wrinkled cheeks
        Draws down and knots a hull of saplings lithe,
      Well-staunch’d with earthy-odour’d moss and sticks
        Known to the feet of birds. This darkness blithe
      He frames against the stars for forest sleepers.
      The living tide of stars aloft that crept
      Compassion’d far below. No wavelet leapt;
      And deep rest fell upon them there. They slept.

      Long, long, the melancholy mountains lay
        Aware; mute-rippling shades that isle enwound.
      Naois fell through dreams, like the snapt spray
        That drops from branch to branch,—that stillest sound!—
      And while from headlands scarce a league away
        The din of the sea-breakers come aground
      Roll’d up the valley, he in vision govern’d
      His ribbéd skiff under Dun Aengus sweeping,
      Triumphing with his love, and leaping, leaping,
      Drew past the ocean-shelves of seals a-sleeping.

      But over starr’d peat-water, where the flag
        Rustles, and listens for the scud of teal;
      Over coast, forest, and bethunder’d crag
        Night—mother of despairs, who proves the steel
      In men, to see if they be dross and slag
        Or fit with trusts and enemies to deal
      Uneyed, alone—diffusing her wide veils
      Bow’d from the heavens to his exultant ear:
      _A questioner awaits thee: rouse!_ The mere
      Slept on, save for the twilight-footed deer.

      “Those antler’d shadows of the forest-roof
        Nigh to the shore must be assembled thick,”
      He thought, “and bringing necks round to the hoof
        Or being aslaked and couching, seek to lick
      The fawns. Some heady bucks engage aloof,
        So sharp across the water comes the click
      Of sparring horns.” But was it a vain terror,
      Son of the sword, or one for courage staunch,
      That the herd, dismay’d, at a bound, with a quivering haunch
      Murmur’d away into night at the crack of a branch?

      And Deirdre woke. Reverberate from on high
        Amongst the sullen hills, distinct there fell
      A mournful keen, like to the broken cry
        From the house of hostage in some citadel
      Of hostages lifting up their agony
        After the land they must remember well,
      “Deirdre is gone! Gone is the little Deirdre!”
      And she knowing not the voice as voice of man
      Stood up. “Lie still, lest thee the spirit ban
      O vein of life, lie still!” But Deirdre ran

      Like the moon through brakes, and saw where nought had been
        On the vague shore what seem’d a stone that stood;
      Faceless, rough-hewn, it forward seem’d to lean
        Like the worn pillar of Cenn Cruaich the God.
      She cried across “If thou with things terrene
        Be number’d, tell me why thy sorrowful blood
      Mourneth, O Cathva, father!” But the stone
      Shiver’d, and broke the staff it lean’d upon,
      Shouting, “What! livst thou yet? Begone, begone!”


                                   V
           VOICE OF FINTAN _again, out of the First Century_,

          Let my lips finish what my lips began.—
          Then to the two beclouded in black boughs
          The third across the water cried “Speak once!
          Though the earth shake beneath you like a sieve
          With wheels of Connachar, answer me this:
          Naois, could she understand his hate
          Whose arm requiteth—far as runs the wind—
          By me, that blow away the gaze and smile
          From women’s faces; O could Deirdre have guess’d—
          Mourning all night the fading of her kingdoms
          Fled like a song—what means, _a banished man_;
          That he and I must hound thee to the death;
          That thou shalt never see the deep-set eaves,
          The lofty thatch familiar with the doves,
          On thy sad mother Usnach’s house again;
          But drift out like some sea-bird, far, far, hence,
          Far from the red isle of the roes and berries,
          Far from sun-galleries and pleasant dúns
          And swards of lovers,—branded, nationless;
          That none of all thy famous friends, with thee
          Wrestlers on Eman in the summer evenings,
          Shall think thee noble now; and that at last
          I must upheave thy heart’s tough plank to crack it—
          Knowing all this, would this fool follow thee?”

          Then spoke Naois, keeping back his wrath,
          “Strange is it one so old should threat with Death!
          Are not both thou and I, are not we all,
          By Death drawn from the wickets of the womb—
          Seal’d with the thumb of Death when we are born?
          As for friends lost (though I believe thee not),
          A man is nourish’d by his enemies
          No less than by his friends. But as for her,
          Because no man shall deem me noble still,—
          Because I like a sea-gull of the isles
          May be driven forth—branded and nationless,—
          Because I shall no more, perhaps, behold
          The deep-set eaves on that all-sacred house,—
          Because the gather’d battle of the powers
          Controlling fortune, breaks upon my head,—
          Yea! for that very cause, lack’d other cause,
          In love the closer,—quenchless,—absolute,
          Would Deirdre choose to follow me. Such pains,
          Seër, the kingdoms are of souls like hers!”
          He spoke; he felt her life-blood at his side
          Sprung of the West, the last of human shores,
          Throbbing, “Look forth on everlastingness!
          Through the coil’d waters and the ebb of light
          I’ll be thy sail!”

                              Over the mist like wool
          No sound; the echo-trembling tarn grew mute.
          But when through matted forest with uproar
          The levy of pursuers, brazen, vast,
          Gush’d like a river, and torch’d chariots drew
          With thunder-footed horses on, and lash’d
          Up to the sedge, and at the Druid’s shape
          Their steamy bellies rose over the brink
          Pawing the mist, and when a terrible voice
          Ask’d of that shape if druid ken saw now
          The twain,—advanced out of the shade of leaves
          Nor Deirdre nor Naois heard reply;
          And like a burning dream the host, dissolving,
          Pass’d. On the pale bank not a torch remain’d.
          They look’d on one another, left alone.


                                THE END




                              OTHER POEMS




                         ODE ON A SILVER BIRCH
                          _in St James’ Park_


                              1

          Muse, I will show thee, on a grassy mound
          Moving with tufted shadows, albeit bare
          Herself, for yet young April primes the air
          And bloom snow-laden boughs, the tree I love.
          London doth compass it with shores of sound
          And thrills the buds when there’s no breath above
          To shake its fountain beauty. Thus I came
          Along the courtly mere of thicket isles,
          And Spring entoil’d me in a hundred wiles,
          Bringing the heart content without a name.
          Broods, russet-plumed and emerald, steer’d on
          With arrowy wake adown the placid tide
          And in that gloomy pool there rode enskied,
          Aloof, the stately languor of a swan.
          But now the lake sets hither with a breeze
          And crooks the peel’d bole of its planes.—Ah, there
          Thou shall find audience—yon’s my shadowy love!—
          O’er head a rose-grey pigeon beat his wings
          About his ’lighted mate, and wooed the bough
          And passion born of sight of mortal things
          In warmth of living, moved and moves me now
          As from the careless height that sways above
          Floateth his voice, the soul of greening trees.


                              2

          Approaching ’twixt the herald saplings pale
          Whose light arrayment is a whirl of green
          Of flamelets dropping for a virgin veil,
          I come. Though Hades’ crocus-jets are stayed,
          Soft! for a golden troop instead upsprung
          Gossips apart in yon unfooted glade.
          Broke we on earshot of that frolic tongue
          Straightway would all be husht, they being afraid
          To sing’t to simple ear of mutest maid.


                              3

          But thou, still silver Spirit, unappall’d
          Standest alone, and with thy senses dim
          Feeling the first warmth fledge the unleaféd limb
          Hearest not tread of mine, O Sun-enthrall’d!
          What buried God conceived thee, and forestall’d
          In the dull depth thy white and glistering graces—
          That fume of netted drops and subtle laces
          And listening statue-air, by men miscall’d?
          Shower o’er the blue, and sister of blown surf!
          Dream-daughter of the silences of turf!
          Couldst thou but waken and recall the Mind
          Lifts thee to image, then could I reveal
          Wherefore thou seem’st remember’d and I feel
          In thee mine own dream risen and divined!


                              4

          Surely the hymn that charm’d thee from the grass
          Fashion’d me also, and the selfsame lyre
          Sounded accords that out of darkness pass
          And in thy beauty and my song conspire?
          The drum of streets, the fever of our homes,
          Clangours and murk metallurgy of gnomes,
          All are by thee unheard, who dost ignore
          The wisdom of the wise, in dead pasts now
          Dungeon’d as never to ascend; but thou
          Whose being is for the light, and hath no care
          To know itself nor root from whence it sprang,
          Wouldst only murmur, in the heavenly air,
          “_The sun, the sun!_” if but thy spirit sang!


                              5

          O might I show thee by the lute’s devising
          Man, from thy soft turf, flown with light, arising!
          Him, too, doth hope, the boon without a pang,
          Summon with thrilling finger forth to hang—
          To cast a heaving soul to the wave of wind,
          Sun-passion’d and earth-lodged. Ah, Tree serene
          Dilating in the glow of the unseen,
          We and our roofs and towers magnifical—
          Our Fame’s heroic head against the sky—
          Our loves—and all
          That, with our briefness perfect, rise and die,—
          Like thee must find
          Beauty in a besieging of the dark;
          Our glories on expectancy embark,
          And the height of our ecstasy—
          The touch of infinity—
          Is blind.




                                A CHARGE


           If thou hast squander’d years to grave a gem
             Commission’d by thy absent Lord, and while
               ’Tis incomplete,
           Others would bribe thy needy skill to them—
               Dismiss them to the street!

           Shouldst thou at last discover Beauty’s grove,
             At last be panting on the fragrant verge,
               But in the track,
           Drunk with divine possession, thou meet Love—
               Turn, at her bidding, back.

           When round thy ship in tempest Hell appears,
             And every spectre mutters up more dire
               To snatch control
           And loose to madness thy deep-kennell’d Fears—
               Then, to the helm, O Soul!

           Last; if upon the cold green-mantling sea
             Thou cling, alone with Truth, to the last spar,
               Both castaway
           And one must perish—let it not be he
               Whom thou art sworn to obey!




                     SONG FOR THE FUNERAL OF A BOY


                              1

          On stems from silver woods
            Carry him, young companions, to the glen
          Where white Olympus broods;
            Flushes of rustlers shall precede you then
                By bush and glade
                Low-thrilling and afraid;
            And as along its curve of shore ye pass
            The dark tarn ruddied with the pine shall glass,
            Moving to hymns out of its lonely ken,
            The boy’s light bier, with beaded rushes laid.


                              2

          In beeches shall the fawn
            An hoof suspend, to learn from that clear sound
          His eager mate withdrawn
            For ever unto free and sylvan ground.
                Up in her hold
                The wide-wing’d Azure cold
            Mantling in gyre on gyre shall mark him come
            By root-paven paths borne, and great bee’s hum
            Swing through your brief procession, winding round
            The endless alleys up that Mountain old.


                              3

          In some low space of green
            Where fleecy mists, bright runnels newly rain’d,
          And springing wands are seen
            But nothing yet to gnarlëd eld attain’d
                Let his head nigh
                The chrisom violet lie;
            And put at hand the sling to him most dear,
            The sheaf of arrows light, the dauntless spear,
            The lute untroubled on the heart unstain’d;
            Then, taking hands around him, sing good-bye.


                              4

          Praise limbs that robb’d the cloud
            Of vengeful eagles, and for this rough nest,
          This egg, embraced the loud
            And everlasting sea-crag’s salty breast!
                Praise to the face
                That smiled on nothing base!
            Hymn ye the laughter of his happy soul—
            His secret kindness to your secret dole;
            The heavenly-minded brook shall mourn him best
            When ye have kiss’d his cheek, quitting the place.


                              5

          This ditty from the brake,
            This rainbow from the waters, fades; and Night
            That little pyre shall take
            In flame and cloud;—but O! when the bloom of light
                With breathless glow
                Along the tops of snow
            Tells out to all the valleys Night is done,—
            Think of the boy, ye young companions bright,
            Not without joy; for he hath loved and gone
            As dews that on the uplands shine and go!




                    COME, LET US MAKE LOVE DEATHLESS


            Come, let us make love deathless, thou and I,
              Seeing that our footing on the Earth is brief—
            Seeing that her multitudes sweep out to die
              Mocking at all that passes their belief.
            For standard of our love not theirs we take:
                        If we go hence to-day
            Fill the high cup that is so soon to break
                        With richer wine than they!

            Ay, since beyond these walls no heavens there be
              Joy to revive or wasted youth repair,
            I’ll not bedim the lovely flame in thee
              Nor sully the sad splendour that we wear.
            Great be the love, if with the lover dies
                        Our greatness past recall,
            And nobler for the fading of those eyes
                        The world seen once for all.




                           CLAVIERS AT NIGHT


             _I watch’d a white-hair’d Figure like a breeze
             Pass, with a smile, down the bare galleries
             And heard his ancient fingers, as he went,
             Muse on the heart of each blind instrument._


                                 SPINET

            Shoaling through twilight to my silver tinglings
            The great-ruff’d ladies beset with pearl
            Come out with the gallants in gems of Cadiz
            In lofty capriols with loud spur-jinglings
            In Roman galliard and in blithe coranto
            Learnt in far Otranto
            Brought home in the galleys of the Earl—
            Storm-riding galleys of the haughty Earl—
            To English vallies.
            They come
            With reverences stately at meeting
            In mockeries sedately retreating
            And stomachers and buckles and rings
            Shake a maze of jewels to the measured strings,
            Of trembling jewels.

            Ay, moonlight’s fair in yew-clipt alleys,
            And young Love fledges
            His shafts ’twixt cypress hedges.
            Follow the rout, and watch in gentle wind
            The springing moonbeam of the fountain sway’d
            Like to a mountain maid
            Who turns with poisëd jar
            From bubbling hollow cool.

            “Behold, how’t tosses rain of Pleiads hither
            Into main blackness of the pool—
            Rings ever shimmering out and sheen reborn;
            So, thou and I, lady, must die
            To wake, as echoes wake, of yonder horn
            With voiceless over the hills of morn.
            Ah, satin-quilted kirtle,
            Ah, pearled bosom,
            Let slip one flake of blossom,
            Deign but a sprig of myrtle,
            To the poor Fool, panting on his bended knee!”
            But silent grow the long swards cedar-shaded
            Where the young loves were sitting;
            And lo, in the silver-candled hall
            The bat is flitting, flitting.
            The tapestries are dusk upon the wall
            And the ladies bright, brocaded,
            All, with their blushes, faded.


                              HARPSICHORD

           Now ye, the delicate patterers of the hush,
           Wings, hither!
           Scarce-rustlers of the sere involvéd leaf
           Who mourn for summers past with elfin grief,
           Ye who can hear along the inmost lawn
           Ebbings and flowings shrill
           When subtle ballads net the rime-cold daffodil
           And drift over the blue turf so nigh dumb
           They startle not from’s gloom e’en the airy fawn.
           Old Antony on his Nile-barge at dawn
           Caught your deck-walkings countless overhead
           And eased with ye a heart eclipsed and dead.
           Come swift, come soon
           Drift, like a veil over the moon,
           And rising round this crumbling Keep
           Shed ye, upon the sleepless, sleep.


                               CLAVICHORD

        Wherefore, poor Fool, dost lie—
        Love, cap and bells put by—
        On thy pallet-bed so stark?
        “I am girt, soul and limb,
        Gainst horror dim.
        Ear tense to hark
        Mine eyeballs strain and swim
        Drowning in foamy dark.
        Comes no shock
        Nor earthly feet
        But the heart’s blood, ebb’d with the chill tower-clock
        To a single beat,
        Clots to a fear
        That God may appear—
        None other eye being near—
        And bare of his mantle of law
        Stand, a giant Spirit beautiful
        Sombre, pale, in avenging mail,
        Wings folded, on this planet’s skull;
        And before Him dropping like fine rain,
        A veil o’ the cloud o’ the dust of kings
        Noiseless descending the old Abyss ...
        Ah then, after this
        How gentle through the dark paths of the brain
        Comes the faint noise of outer things;
        The whirr and shower of wings—
        Satin shufflings of ivy leaves
        Ranging like bees the leaden pane—
        Jolting of carters, cries of falconers—
        The blessed courtyard stirs
        That do in mercy say
        Thou hast another day.”




                            THE MAN DIGGING


           The isle was barren. Far as hawk may scan
           In moors it roll’d up to a headland bare
           Save for one narrow patch, by ceaseless care
           Sumptuous with corn. Against the sky a Man
           Digging the waste I saw,—bow’d veteran
           A stubborn spade he drave in stubborn ground
           And root and rock flung sheer without a sound
           Over the bleak edge.... Then anew began.

           “You, who have lodged in the teeth of the abyss
           Your cabin low, and triumph rich as this
           Wrung from the ocean-bitter mountain side,
           What help’d you most to bring such treasure out?”
           He stood, and after scrutiny replied,
           “The thing on which I lean, the Spade of Doubt.”




                              SCHIEHALLION


                    Far the grey loch runs
                      Up to Schiehallion.
                    Lap, lap the water flows
                    Where my wee boatie rows;
                    Greenly a star shows
                      Over Schiehallion.

                    She that I wander’d wi’
                      Over Schiehallion,—
                    How far ayont your ken,
                    Crags of the merry glen,
                    Stray’d she, that wander’d then
                      Down fra Schiehallion!

                    Sail of the wild swan
                      Turn to Schiehallion!
                    Here where the rushes rise
                    Low the black hunter lies;
                    Beat thou the pure skies
                      Back to Schiehallion!




                               THE SHELL


           I am a Shell out of the Asian sea,
             But my sad Pearl is gone,
           Risen to be Goddess—Venus green is she
             And I cast up alone.

           Yet some night shall her brilliance stoop and take
             Unto her ear this shell,
           And hear the whisper of her own heart-break ...
             All that I serve to tell.




                           THE ROCK OF CLOUD


             We heard a chanting in the fog
               On the frore face of the sea,
             And stay’d the galley like a log
               To sound that mystery.

             And men throng’d up into the bow
               And hail’d the curling rack,
             “_What demon or what spirit thou?_”
               And the lone voice came back,

             Came as of one so evil-starr’d
               That he hath done with grief,
             In monotone as keen and hard
               As the bell swung from a reef:

             “Human I am—would I were foam—
               Row hither; ye may hear
             Yet shall not save nor bring me home
               Seek ye a thousand year.”

             “_Keep a stout hope._” “I keep no hope.”
               “_Man alive_” “Spare your toil—”
             “_We are upon thee!_” “Nay, no rope
               Over the gap shall coil.”

             “_Who art thou?_” “I was Pilot once
               On many a ship of mark:
             Went aboard—spoke to none—but steer’d;
               And dropt off in the dark.

             “But one night—Christ!—we struck—we sank.
               I reach’d this rock of wings
             Whereby from every boulder’s flank
               The brown sea-ribbon swings.

             “Here, where the sole eye of the Sun
               Did scorch my body bare,
             A great Sea-Spirit rose, and shone
               In the water thrill’d with hair....

             “She lay back on the green abyss
               Beautiful; her spread arms
             Soothed to a poise—a sob—of bliss
               Huge thunders and alarms.

             “Her breasts as pearl were dull and pure,
               Her body’s chasted light
             Swam like a cloud; her eyes unsure
               From the great depths were bright.

             “There was no thing of bitterness
               In aught that she could say;
             She call’d my soul, as down a coast
               The Moon calls bay beyond bay
             And they rise—back o’ the uttermost—
               Away, and yet away:—

             “‘I chose thee from the sinking crews—
               I bore thee up alive—
             Now durst thou follow me and choose
               Under the world to dive?

             “‘Come! we will catch when stars are out
               The black wave’s spitting crest
             And still, when the Bull of Dawn shall spout,
               Be washing on abreast;

             “‘Or thee a flame under the seas
               Paven with suns I’ll hide,
             Deathless and boundless and at ease
               In any shape to glide.

             “‘All waters that on Earth have well’d
               At last to me repair,—
             All mountains starr’d with cities melt
               Into my dreamy air.

             “‘Set on thy peak under the brink
               I’ll shew thee Storms above,
             The stuff of kingdoms:—they shall sink
               While thou dost teach me love;
             On beaches white as the young Moons
               I’ll sit, and fathom love.’”...

                    ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

             “_And what saidst thou?_” “From over sea
               I felt a sighing burn
             That made this jagg’d rock seem to me
               More delicate than fern;

             “And faint as moth-wings I could hear
               Tops of the pine-tree sway
             And the last words spoken in mine ear
               Before the break of day.

             “And I cried out agonied at heart
               For her that sleeps at home,
             ‘Brightness, I will not know thine art,
               Nor to thy country come!’

             “Straightway she sank—smiling so pale—
               But from the seethe up-broke—
             Never thrash’d off by gust or gale—
               White, everlasting smoke.

             “It feels all over me with stealth
               Of languor that appals;
             It laps my fierce heart in a wealth
               Of soft and rolling walls;

             “This mist no life may pass, save these
               Wave-wing’d, with shrieking voice;
             Stars I discern not, nor the seas—”
               “_O, dost not rue thy choice?_”

             “Rue it? Now get back to the Deep,
               For I doubt if men ye be:
             No;—I must keep a steady helm
               By the star I cannot see.”

             Passion o’ man! we sprang to oars,
               And sought on, weeping loud,
             All night in earshot of the shores
               But never through the cloud.




                SHE COMES NOT WHEN NOON IS ON THE ROSES


          She comes not when Noon is on the roses—
                  Too bright is Day.
          She comes not to the Soul till it reposes
                  From work and play.

          But when Night is on the hills, and the great Voices
                  Roll in from Sea,
          By starlight and by candlelight and dreamlight
                  She comes to me.




                               THE NIGHT


         I put aside the branches
           That clothe the Door in gloom;
         A glow-worm lit the pathway
           And a lamp out of her room
         Shook down a stifled greeting:
           How could it greet aright
         The thirst of years like deserts
           That led up to this night?

         But she, like sighing forests,
           Stole on me—full of rest,
         Her hair was like the sea’s wave,
           Whiteness was in her breast,—
         (_So does one come, at night, upon a wall of roses._)

         As in a stone of crystal
           The cloudy web and flaw

         Turns, at a flash, to rainbows,
         Wing’d I became—I saw
         I sang;—but human singing
         Ceased, in a burning awe.

         Slow, amid leaves, in silence—
         Rapt as the holy pray—
         Flame into flame we trembled
         And the world sank away.




                             MAURYA’S SONG


             Rushes that grow by the black water
             When will I see you more?
             When will the sorrowful heart forget you,
             Land of the green, green shore?
             When will the field and the small cabin
                       See us more
                       In the old country?

             What is to me all the gold yonder?
             She that bore me is gone.
             Knees that dandled and hands that blessed me
             Colder than any stone;
             Stranger to me than the face of strangers
                       Are my own
                       In the old country.

             Vein o’ my heart, from the lone mountain
             The smoke of the turf will die
             And the stream that sang to the young childer
             Run down alone from the sky:
             On the door-stone, grass,—and the cloud lying
                       Where they lie
                       In the old country.


   Tired with the day’s monotony of dreaméd joys
   I turn to a requickening voice,
   A voice whose low tone devastates with nightly thrill
   The cities I have wrought at will:
   Stone forts depart, and armies heroic flee away
   Like the wild snow of spray.
   Deep down the green Broceliande’s branch’d corridors
   That voice of April pours;
   Light as a bird’s light shadow fled across my pages
   A touch disturbs the ages,
   And the crags and spears of Troy and the courts of Charlemain,
   Odin, and the splendid strain
   Of Cuchullain’s self, that with his heart’s high brother strove,—
   Fade, at the low voice I love.




                            YOU WERE STAY’D


                 You were stay’d in heart on heaven,
                 I by none but you forgiven,—
                 You unto your Light are taken,
                 I of all, in you, forsaken.

                 Where the night is never broken
                 Where for long no speech hath spoken,
                 There the ears no longer hearken,
                 There the eyeballs wane and darken.

                 Yet at hours my soul—so bounded—
                 By that gloom like blood surrounded—
                 Sees in ancient daylight burning—
                 Hears departed feet returning.




                               THE BLOOM


         Who are these ancients, gnarl’d and moss’d and weigh’d
           This way and that, under the sluggard blue
         And shine of morning—these whose arms are laid
           Low to the grasses and the sheets of dew—
         These bowers ruggëd within and thickly knit
           But feather’d over with a roseate white
         So frail that the breeze’s touch dismantles it
           And brings from cradled nurseries in flight—
               Snow-soft—the petals down
               In shadows green to drown?

         We are the matrons. Bent are we and riven
           Under such years of ripeness manifold
         That unto us a special grace is given,—
           To wear a virgin’s beauty being old.
         Noiseless we wear it; round us in the croft
           These whisperers are leaves of other trees,
         Babblers that have not learn’d by fruitage oft
           To shade the heart with wide serenities
               On tendons knit to bear
               Sweetness in stormy air.




                   IN THE ROMAN AMPHITHEATRE, VERONA


              Two architects of Italy—austere
              Men who could fashion nothing small—refused
              To die with life, and for their purpose used
              This dim and topless Amphitheatre.

              Some Cæsar trench’d the orb of its ellipse
              And call’d on distant provinces to swell
              Resonant arches whence his World could scan,
              Tier above tier, the fighters and the ships.

              But Dante—having raised, as dreamer can,
              Higher tenfold these walls immutable—
              Sole in the night arena, grew aware
              He was himself the thing spectacular
              Seized by the ever-thirsting gaze of Hell,—
              Here, on the empty sand, a banish’d man.




                             A WINTER SONG


                           _To Alice Meynell_

              Lady, through grasses stiff with rime
                And wraith-hung trees I wander
              Where the red sun at pitch of prime
                Half of his might must squander;
                    Narrow the track
                    As I look back
                    On traces green behind me,—
                    I go alone
                    To think upon
                    A face, where none
                    Shall find me.

              Birds peal; but each grim grove its shroud
                Retains, as to betoken
              Though the young lawn should wave off cloud
                These would have Night unbroken,—
                    Desire no plash
                    Of the Lake awash—
                    No gold but gold that’s glinted
                    In still device
                    From the breast of ice
                    Whose summer cries
                    Have stinted.

              But in a great and glittering space
                The black Elm doth restore me
              To you. Empower’d with patient grace
                Musing she stands before me,—
                    Her webs divine
                    Ghosted with fine
                    Remembrance few can capture;
                    Her very shade
                    On greenness laid
                    Is white,—is made
                    Of rapture!




                               THE NUTTER


                             1

         I am the Autumn. Rising from the throne
           I watch the pageant of my courtiers pass;
         Chestnuts’ canary-feather’d beauty strown—
           The lime’s gold tribute at his foot amass—
         Then fragile jewels from the larches blown
           Enrich with disarray the trembling grass,
         Until the beggar’d elms, too proud to bend,
         Emblaze a hundred winds with my rash kingdom’s end.


                             2

         But look! within the beech’s burning house
           Some Nutter, deaf to shouts of fellow-thieves,
         Hath flung him with his crook to dream and drowse
           Flush-cheek’d, alone, upon the mounded leaves.
         The curious squirrel headlong from his eaves
           Creeps down to mark: then drops with sudden souse;
         The still-come culvers burst away—and flits
         The beechmast-feasting multitude of shadowy tits.


                             3

         Where are thy friends? Gone on to sack the glades,
           My rooms of tatter’d state, not to return.
         No moth-bright brambles and no rainy braids
           Of ivy, mid the sheen and smoke of fern,
         Could trammel-up the tempest of their raids.
           Up, boy! pursue them down the misty burn!
         But on his bosom tann’d, in slumber fast,
         Patter’d the mimic shower of ever-dropping mast.


                             4

         What, lad? The last of my poor banquet lose
           To thy wild kin of air? For them the dell
         O’er-briar’d hath lean rose-berries and yews
           And scarlet fruits of ash, that ere they swell
         The missel-thrushes, fluttering, poise to choose,—
           Privet is theirs and briony as well,
         And redwings wait for the frost-mellow’d sloe,
         Their orchard is the spinney-side—Awake, and go!


                             5

         Leaf-driven, my young October in a while
           Awoke bemazed—on ragged knee arose
         Snatch’d at his crook, and hid a shaméd smile
           Vaulting the ruddy brambles. As he goes
           Far off I hear his voice; so freshet flows
         Warbling to wander many a forest mile—
           So Dryad may her rooty pool forsake
           Afraid, or antler’d shadow melt into the brake.


                             6

         And I go too,—ah! not with mortal things
           Naked of riches here to flutter down—
         But soar and tremble in a million wings
           Above the fen, the coastland, and the town
           Forth by the dark sea’s sunken islands boune
         Sweeping to choir Apollo where he sings
           Unslain! The midsea lamp, that hears the sky
           Roaring all night with passage, knows that it is I.




                              SHAKESPEARE


            If many a daring spirit must discover
            The chartless world, why should they glory lack?
            Because athwart the skyline they sank over
            Few, few, the shipmen be that have come back.

            Yet one, wreck’d oft, hath by a giddy cord
            The rugged head of Destiny regain’d—
            One from the maelstrom’s lap hath swum aboard—
            One from the polar sleep himself unchain’d.

            But he, acquainted well with every tone
            Of madness whining in his shroudage slender,
            From storm and mutiny emerged alone
            Self-righted from the dreadful self-surrender:

            Rich from the isles where sojourn long is death
            Won back to cool Thames and Elizabeth,
            Sea-weary, yes, but human still, and whole,—
            A circumnavigator of the soul.




                                 NOTES


_Deirdre Wed._ This episode of thirty hours, delivered by the Three
Voices, does not occur in any of the versions of the famous “Tragical
tale of the Sons of Usnach.” But the manner of Deirdre’s wooing of Naois
is based on an incident in a Gaelic version of that tale, in which, on a
day (not her marriage day) Deirdre and her women companions “were out on
the hillock behind the house enjoying the scene and drinking in the
sun’s heat. What did they see coming but three men a-journeying. Deirdre
was looking at the men that were coming, and wondering at them. When the
men neared them, Deirdre remembered the language of the huntsmen and she
said to herself that these were the three sons of Usnach, and that this
was Naois, he having what was above the bend of his two shoulders above
the men of Erin all.” The three brothers went past without taking any
notice of them, and without even glancing at the young girls on the
hillock. “What happened but that love for Naois struck the heart of
Deirdre, so that she could not but follow after him. She trussed her
raiment and went after the three men that went past the base of the
knoll, leaving her women attendants there. Aillean and Ardan had heard
of the women that Connachar, King of Ulster, had with him, and they
thought that if Naois their brother saw her he would have her himself,
more especially as she was not married to the king.” They perceived the
woman coming and called on one another to hasten their steps as they had
a long distance to travel and the dusk of night was coming on. They did
so. She cried three times “Naois, son of Usnach, wilt thou leave me?”
“What cry is that which it is not well for me to answer, and not easy
for me to refuse?” Twice the brothers put him off with excuses. “But the
third time Naois and Deirdre met, and Deirdre kissed Naois three times
and a kiss to each of his brothers.” All other incidents in the episodic
poem _Deirdre Wed_ are new.

_Fintan_; _Urmael_; _Cir_. These were old bards. I have myself found and
explored a tomb like that of Cir, caverned through a hill-ridge, not far
from Eman and Armagh, just as it is described in the poem. But the
curious may rediscover it for themselves.

_Connachar._ This king, or terrestrial divinity, is generally known as
Conchobar, or Conor, King of Ulster (Uladh) and Arch-King of Ireland. He
is chronicled as reigning about the time of the Incarnation of Christ.

_Eman_, or Emain Macha, was the chief palace of Connachar. It is still
seen and named in the “Navan Ring”—enormous earthworks on a hill about
two miles west of Armagh. The people from the town and country side
still go up to dance there on holidays. Traces of the Lake of
Pearls—where jewels were cast in on a sudden flight, lie in a marsh
under Eman. The _Callan_, or “loud-sounding” river, runs not very far
off.

_Dun Aengus._ A prehistoric stone fortress—singularly vast—on the edge
of the cliffs of Arran Môr, an island in the Atlantic, west of Galway.
The walls are very massive, and lie half-circle-wise, as if half had
broken off and fallen into the sea.




                               PRINTED BY
                          TURNBULL AND SPEARS,
                               EDINBURGH

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

   71 With volcelest over the hills of With voiceless over the hills of
      morn                             morn

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEIRDRE WED AND OTHER POEMS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


