The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pistols for two
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pistols for two

Author: H. L. Mencken
        George Jean Nathan

Release date: March 3, 2025 [eBook #75507]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 1917

Credits: Bob Taylor and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PISTOLS FOR TWO ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  PISTOLS FOR TWO

  BY
  OWEN HATTERAS

  [Illustration: Decoration]

  NEW YORK    MCMXVII

  ALFRED · A · KNOPF




_Published, September, 1917_


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

  GEORGE JEAN NATHAN                                                   5

  H. L. MENCKEN                                                       21




PISTOLS FOR TWO




I


Biography fails, like psychology, because it so often mistakes
complexity for illumination. Its aim is to present a complete picture
of a man; its effect is usually to make an impenetrable mystery of
him. The cause of this, it seems to me, lies in the fact that the
biographer always tries to explain him utterly, to account for him in
every detail, to give an unbroken coherence to all his acts and ideas.
The result is a wax dummy, as smooth as glass but as unalive as a dill
pickle.

It is by no such process of exhaustion that we get our notions of
the people we really know. We see them, not as complete images, but
as processions of flashing points. Their personalities, so to speak,
are not revealed brilliantly and in the altogether, but as shy things
that peep out, now and then, from inscrutable swathings, giving us
a hint, a suggestion, a moment of understanding. Does a man really
know what is going on in his wife’s mind? Not if she _has_ a mind.
What he knows is only that infinitesimal part which she reveals,
sometimes deliberately and even truculently, but more often naïvely,
surreptitiously, accidentally. He judges her as a human being, not by
anything approaching entire knowledge of her, but by bold and scattered
inferences. He sees her soul, in so far as he sees it at all, in the
way she buttons her boots, in the way she intrigues for a kiss, in
the way she snaps her eye at him when he has been naughty—interprets
her ego in terms of her taste in ribbons, the scent of her hair, her
quarrels with her sisters, her fashion of eating artichokes, her skill
at home millinery, the débris on her dressing table, her preferences in
the theater, her care of her teeth.

Thus, by slow degrees, he accumulates an image of her—an image changing
incessantly, and never more than half sensed. After long years,
perhaps, he begins to know her after a fashion. That is, he knows how
many shredded wheat biscuits she likes for breakfast, how much of his
business she understands, how long she can read a first-class novel
without napping, what she thinks of woolen underwear, the New Irish
Movement, the family doctor, soft-boiled eggs, and God....

I enter upon these considerations because I have been employed by a
committee of _aluminados_, heeled well enough to pay my honorarium,
to conjure up recognizable images of MM. George Jean Nathan and H.
L. Mencken, that their scattered partisans and the public generally
may see them more clearly. The job has its difficulties, for save in
their joint editorial concern with _The Smart Set_ magazine and their
common antipathy to certain prevailing sophistries, they are no more
alike than a hawk and a handsaw. But in one other thing, at least,
they also coalesce, and that is in the paucity of news about them.
Most other magazine editors are constantly in the papers—discoursing
on the literary art, agitating for this or that, getting themselves
interviewed. These twain, however, pursue a more _pianissimo_ course,
and so not much is known about them, even inaccurately....


II

The job invites. One reads regularly what magazine editors think of
their contributors, but who ever reads what magazine contributors—of
whom I, Hatteras, am one—think of their editors? A vast and
adventurous field here enrolls itself, believe me. I know, more or less
intimately, most of the editors of the great American periodicals, and
I am constantly amused by the inaccuracy of the prevailing notions
about them—notions diligently fostered, in many cases, by their own
more or less subtle chicane. Consider, for example, the dean of the
order, M. George Harvey, of the _North American Review_. His portrait
shows a thoughtful old gentleman reading a book, his forefinger pressed
affectionately against his right frontal sinus. Recalling the high
mental pressure of his daily concerns, one concludes at once that he is
struggling through Talboys Wheeler’s epitome of the Maha-Bhārāta, or
Locke’s “Conduct of the Understanding.” But I have it from the Colonel
himself—a confidence quite spontaneous and apparently sincere—that
at the precise moment the photographer squeezed the bird he was
thinking—what? Simply this: how much prettier Mlle. Mary Pickford would
be if her lower limbs were less richly developed laterally. The book
was the _Photoplay Magazine_.

Again, there is M. Robert H. Davis, editor of the Munsey publications.
The official views of M. Davis depict him as a man of the great
outdoors, a stalker of the superior carnivora, a dead shot, a fisher of
tarpons and sharks, a rover of the primeval forests. He is dressed up
like a cover of _Field and Stream_, a doggish pipe in his mouth, his
tropics formidably encircled by cartridges and fish worms. But what
are the facts? The facts are that Davis does all his fishing in the
Fulton Market, and that the bear-skin which in his pictures he is seen
holding triumphantly at arm’s length actually graces his library floor
and was bought at Revillon Frères. He is a God-fearing, mild-mannered,
and respectable man, an admirer of Elihu Root, a Prohibitionist, a
member of the Red Cross and the S. P. C. A. The only actual hunting he
ever does is to hunt for someone to agree with him that M. Irvin Cobb
is a greater man than Mark Twain or Dostoievsky. And when it comes to
fishing, he has said all he has to say when he brings up a couple of
sardellen out of the mayonnaise.

Yet again, there are such fellows as Doty, of the _Century_; Towne,
of _McClure’s_; Bok, of the _Ladies’ Home Journal_; Siddall, of the
_American_; and Fox, of the _Police Gazette_. Doty prints Edith
Wharton and Rabindranath Tagore—and reads, by choice, H. C. Witwer
and Selma Lagerlöf. Fox collects Chinese jades and Sheraton chairs,
and is a member of the Lake Mohonk Conference. Siddall used to be
a hoochie-coochie sideshow ballyhoo with Ringling’s Circus. Towne,
throwing off the editorial mask of moral indignation, writes tender
triolets in the privacy of his chambers. Bok, viewed popularly as a
muff—the wags of the National Press Club once put him down as one of
the ladies entertained by them—is a rough, wild creature, a huge,
knobby Hollander, with a voice like an auctioneer’s. And Eastman of the
_Masses_, the prophet of revolt, the savior of the oppressed—what of
Eastman? Eastman, _au naturel_, gives no more damns for the oppressed
than you or I. His aim in life, the last time I met him in society,
was to find a chauffeur who was not a drunkard and had no flair for
debauching the parlor-maids. On this theme he pumped up ten times the
eloquence he has ever emitted over Unearned Increments and Wage Slaves.


III

In a similar way are the MM. George Jean Nathan and H. L. Mencken
misviewed. And it is because I see here an opportunity to experiment
with my private theory of biography that I enter with some enjoyment
the enterprise, thus thrown on me, of exhibiting the facts. To this
end, I herewith present a list of the things I happen to know about
the two gentlemen in question, leaving whoever cares for the job to go
through it and construct for himself a definite and symmetrical effigy.
So:




GEORGE JEAN NATHAN


He was born in Fort Wayne, Indiana, February 14 and 15 (the stunning
event occurred precisely at 12 midnight) 1882.

His boyhood ambition was to be an African explorer in a pith helmet,
with plenty of room on the chest ribbon for medals that would be
bestowed upon him by the beauteous Crown Princess of Luxembourg.

He was educated at Cornell University and the University of Bologna, in
Italy.

He is a man of middle height, straight, slim, dark, with eyes like the
middle of August, black hair which he brushes back _à la française_,
and a rather sullen mouth.

He smokes from the moment his man turns off the matutinal showerbath
until his man turns it on again at bedtime.

He rarely eats meat.

He lives in a bachelor apartment, nearly one-third of which is occupied
by an ice-box containing refreshing beverages. On the walls of his
apartment are the pictures of numerous toothsome creatures. He is at
the present time occupied in writing a book describing his sentimental
adventures among them.

He has published the following books: “Europe After 8:15,” in
collaboration with Mencken and Mr. Willard Huntington Wright; “Another
Book on the Theater,” “Bottoms Up,” and “Mr. George Jean Nathan
Presents.”

He has written for almost every magazine in America, except _Good
Housekeeping_ and _The Nation_.

He dresses like the late Ward McAllister and wears daily a boutonnière
of blue corn flowers.

He dislikes women over twenty-one, actors, cold weather, mayonnaise
dressing, people who are always happy, hard chairs, invitations to
dinner, invitations to serve on committees in however worthy a cause,
railroad trips, public restaurants, rye whisky, chicken, daylight, men
who do not wear waistcoats, the sight of a woman eating, the sound
of a woman singing, small napkins, Maeterlinck, Verhaeren, Tagore,
Dickens, Bataille, fried oysters, German soubrettes, French John
Masons, American John Masons, tradesmen, poets, married women who
think of leaving their husbands, professional anarchists of all kinds,
ventilation, professional music lovers, men who tell how much money
they have made, men who affect sudden friendships and call him Georgie,
women who affect sudden friendships and then call him Mr. Nathan,
writing letters, receiving letters, talking over the telephone, and
wearing a hat.

In religion he is a complete agnostic, and views all clergymen with a
sardonic eye. He does not believe that the soul is immortal. What will
happen after death he doesn’t know and has never inquired.

He is subject to neuralgia. He is a hypochondriac and likes to rehearse
his symptoms. Nevertheless, a thorough physical examination has shown
that he is quite sound. His Wassermann reaction is, and always has
been, negative. He is eugenically fit.

He never reads the political news in the papers. He belongs to a
college fraternity and several university societies.

The room in which he works is outfitted with shaded lamps and heavy
hangings, and somewhat suggests a first-class bordello. He works with
his coat on and shuts the windows and pulls down all the curtains.
He writes with a pencil on sheets of yellow paper. He cannot use a
typewriter.

He detests meeting people, even on business, and swears every time
a caller is announced at _The Smart Set_ office. He never receives a
woman caller save with his secretary in the room.

He wears an amethyst ring. In his waistcoat pocket he carries an
elegant golden device for snapping off the heads of cigars. He has his
shoes shined daily, even when it rains.

Like the late McKinley, he smokes but half of a cigar, depositing
the rest in the nearest spitbox. Like Mark Twain, he enjoys the more
indelicate varieties of humor. Like Beethoven, he uses neither morphine
nor cocaine. Like Sitting Bull and General Joffre, he has never read
the Constitution of the United States.

He bought Liberty Bonds. He can eat spinach only when it is chopped
fine. He knows French, Latin, Italian, and German, but is ignorant of
Greek. He plays the piano by ear.

In his taste in girls, he runs to the _demi-tasse_. I have never heard
of him showing any interest in a woman more than five feet in height,
or weighing more than 105 pounds.

An anarchist in criticism, he is in secret a very diligent student
of Lessing, Schlegel, Hazlitt, and Brandes. His pet aversion, among
critics, was the late William Winter.

He has no interest in any sport, save tennis and fencing, and never
plays cards. He never accepts an invitation to dinner if he can avoid
it by lying. He never goes to weddings, and knows few persons who marry.

As a critic, he has been barred from many theaters. A. L. Erlanger, in
particular, is a manager who views him as a colleague of Mephisto.

He eats very little.

He drinks numerous cocktails (invariably the species known as “orange
blossom,” to which he has added two drops of Grenadine), a rich
Burgundy, and, now and then, a bit of brandy.

He once told me that he had no use for a woman who wasn’t sad at
twilight.

He has two male companions—so many and no more: Mencken and John D.
Williams, the theatrical producer. He is rarely seen with any other.

He was born, as the expression has it, with a gold spoon in his mouth.
He has never had to work for a living.

He works daily from 10 A.M. until 5 P.M. He plays from 5:30 until 8:30.
Evenings, he spends in the theater. After the theater, he has supper.
He retires anywhere from 11 P.M. to 3 A.M.

He has made many trips abroad and has lived at different times in
France, England, Germany, Italy, Austria, the Argentine, India, Japan
and Algiers.

He fell in love at first sight in 1913 with a flower girl in the
Luitpold Café in Munich, but the hussy was distant.

He would rather have Lord Dunsany in _The Smart Set_ once than William
Dean Howells a hundred times.

He often writes sentences so involved that he confesses he himself
doesn’t know what they mean.

He admires Max Beerbohm, Conrad, Dr. Llewellys Barker, Mozart, the
Fifth and Ninth Symphonies and the songs in “Oh, Boy,” sardines,
ravioli, Havelock Ellis chocolate cake, Molnar, Hauptmann, Royalton
cigars, Anatole France, _Simplicissimus_, _E. W. Howe’s Monthly_,
an eiderdown blanket and a hard pillow, a thick-toothed comb and
stiff brush, Schnitzler, bitter almond soap, George Ade, Richard
Strauss, Pilsner, Huneker, Florenz Ziegfeld, Edwin Lefèvre’s story
“Without End,” the quartette in the Piccadilly in London, the Café
Viel in Paris, the overcoat shop in the Stefansplatz in Vienna, the
strawberries in the Palais de Danse in Berlin.

He believes, politically, in an autocracy of the elect, for the elect,
and by the elect.... His father was a Democrat.

He has written one play, “The Eternal Mystery,” which was produced on
the Continent in 1914 and in America in 1915. He has forbidden the
production of the play henceforth in any American city save Chicago,
in which city anyone who chooses may perform it without payment of
royalties.

In 1904 he won the Amsler gold medal for proficiency with the foils.
He studied fencing under Lieutenant Philip Brigandi, of the Italian
cavalry, and Captain Albert Androux, the celebrated French master of
foils.

Fifteen minutes in the sun gives his complexion the shade of mahogany;
twenty minutes, the shade of Booker T. Washington.

He wears the lightest weight underwear through the coldest winter.

He owns thirty-eight overcoats of all sorts and descriptions. Overcoats
are a fad with him. He has them from heavy Russian fur to the flimsiest
homespun.... He owns one with an alpine hood attachment.

He belongs to several metropolitan clubs, but never enters them.

He has never been in jail. He has been arrested but once: at the age of
twenty for beating up a street-car conductor.

He always has his jackets made with two breast pockets: one for his
handkerchief, the other for his reading glasses. The latter are of the
horn species.

His telephone operator, at his apartment, has a list of five persons
to whom he will talk—so many and no more. He refuses to answer the
telephone before five o’clock in the afternoon.

His favorite places of eating in New York are the Café des Beaux Arts,
the Kloster Glocke, and the Japanese Garden in the Ritz.

He can down several hundred olives at a single sitting.

He knows more about the modern foreign theater than any other American.

He is a lineal descendant of Petöfi Sándor, the national poet of
Hungary, and of Thomas Bourgchier, archbishop of Canterbury.

An examination of his blood, on July 1, 1917, showed: Hb., 111%; W.
B. C., 8,175. A phthalein test showed: 1st hr., 50%, 2d hr., 20%;
total, 70%. Blood pressure: 129/77. Gastric analysis: Free HCl, 11.5%;
combined, 20%. No stasis. No lactic acid.

He entered the New York Public Library for the first time on March 7,
1917, being taken there by A. Toxen Worm, of Copenhagen.

He never accepts a dinner invitation until invited three separate
times, and then usually sends his regrets at the last moment.

The living Americans who most interest him are Josephus Daniels and
Frank A. Munsey.

The only poet that he admires is John McClure. He seldom reads poetry.
He has never read “Paradise Lost.”

He never visits a house a second time in which he has encountered dogs,
cats, children, automatic pianos, grace before or after meals, women
authors, actors, _The New Republic_, or prints of the Mona Lisa.

He is not acquainted with a single clergyman, Congressman, general, or
reformer. He has never met any of the Vice-Presidents of the United
States.

He is free of adenoids.

His knee jerks are normal.

He has never been inside a church.

He has been writing dramatic criticism for thirteen successive years,
and in that time has seen more than 3000 plays in America, 400 in
England, and 1900 on the Continent. He has simultaneously syndicated
critical articles to as many as forty-two newspapers, and has served as
dramatic critic to seven metropolitan magazines.

In 1910, on a wager, he wrote sixteen magazine articles in a single
month.

Among his short stories are “D. S. W.,” “Nothing to Declare,” “But I
Love Her,” “The Soul Song,” “The Triple Expense,” etc.

Among his most widely quoted retorts is that made by him to the
newspaper interviewer who asked him if it was true that a disgruntled
theatrical manager named Gest had alluded to him as a “pinhead.”
“That,” replied Nathan, “is on the face of it absurd. ‘Pinhead’ is a
word of two syllables.”

He once observed that the reason the galleries of our theaters, as our
theatrical managers lament, are no longer filled with newsboys is that
all the newsboys are now theatrical managers.

He wrote the introduction to Eleanor Gates’ play, “The Poor Little Rich
Girl.”

He is the first American critic to have written of the dramatists
Molnar, Brighouse, and Bracco.

His mother’s family were the pioneer settlers of Fort Wayne, Indiana.
His father’s family were figures in the continental world of letters.
His father spoke eleven languages, including the Chinese.

He frequently spends an entire afternoon polishing up a sentence in one
of his compositions. And he often stops writing for a couple of days,
or as long as it takes him, to hit upon an appropriate adjective or
phrase.

He never writes love letters, and seldom reads them.

He cannot operate a motor car, or cook anything, or wind a dynamo, or
fix a clock, or guess the answer to a riddle, or milk a cow.

He regards camping out as the most terrible diversion ever invented by
man.

He knows nothing of country life, and cannot tell a wheat field from
a potato patch. He regards all deciduous trees as oaks, and all
evergreens as cedars.

He has yet to drink his first glass of Hires’ Root Beer.

He regards Al Woods as the most competent commercial manager in the
American theater.

His library contains every known book on the drama published in the
English, French, German, and Italian languages.

He owns many of the original Dunsany manuscripts.

Accused by certain of his critics of a flippant attitude toward the
drama, he in reality takes the drama very seriously. The theater, on
the other hand, he regards four out of five times as a joke.

He concurs in the Walpole philosophy that life is a tragedy to him who
feels and a comedy to him who thinks.

He is a good listener. His invariable practice with talkers is to let
the latter talk themselves out and then, after a moment’s studious
silence, to nod his head and say yes. He never argues, never disagrees,
no matter how bizarre the conversationalist’s pronunciamentos.

The Paris journal, _Le Temps_, frequently translates his critical
articles and quotes from them copiously.

He owns an autographed photograph of the Russian mystic, Rasputin,
presented to him by the latter six years ago.

He dislikes all forms of publicity. He has an aversion to
self-advertisement that amounts almost to a mania. He believes, with
Mencken, that whom the gods would destroy, they first make popular.

He takes a companion with him to the theater only on rare occasions. He
uses the extra seat sent him by the managers as a depository for his
hat and overcoat.

He always has thirty or forty lead pencils beside him when he writes.
The moment one becomes a trifle dull he picks up another. He cannot
sharpen the pencils well enough to suit himself and has the job done by
his secretary.

He hasn’t the slightest intention of ever getting married.

He believes that the motor trip from Watkins Glen to Elmira, in New
York State, is the most beautiful in America.

Among the Presidents of the United States he admires most—and by long
odds—the late Grover Cleveland.

He believes the dirtiest spot in the world to be the Azores.

He believes Shaw’s “Cæsar and Cleopatra” to be the best modern British
play, Brieux’s “Les Hannetons” the best modern French play, and
Dunsany’s “Gods of the Mountain” the best modern Irish play.

He gets squiffed about once in six weeks, usually in company with John
Williams. He has a headache the next day.

He carries a tube of menthol in his pocket and sniffs at it forty times
a day.

He has been writing his monthly article for _The Smart Set_ since 1909.
He and Mencken became editors of the magazine in August, 1914.

He began his career as a man of letters by reporting for the New York
_Herald_. He reads the _Times_ and _Globe_ daily.

Among his critical contemporaries in New York he has the highest
respect for Louis Sherwin. Of American dramatists he most admires Avery
Hopwood. Of American dramatic critics his vote is probably for Henry T.
Parker, of the Boston _Transcript_.

In his own opinion, the best thing he has ever written is “The Eternal
Mystery.”

He has never been to Washington, nor to California, nor to Boston.

He has never made a speech, nor delivered a lecture, nor sat on a
committee. He has never subscribed to a charity fund.

He wears a No. 14½ collar and No. 7¼ hat. His favorite soup is _Crême
de Sante_.

The only author he ever invites to his office is Harry Kemp. He detests
Kemp’s poetry.

The temperature of his daily bath is 67 degrees.

A practitioner of preciosity in style, he nevertheless dictates
business and social letters in a “would say” manner, and has his
secretary sign them.

In 1900 he fought a duel with pistols outside of Florence, Italy, and
was wounded in the left shoulder. He is still a trifle lame from the
wound.

Returning to America in 1912 on the _Philadelphia_, during a rough
passage he was the only passenger on the ship to appear in the dining
saloon for four successive days. With three of the stewards, he passed
the time by improvising a bowling alley in the saloon, utilizing
mutton chops for the pins and oranges for the balls. The latter were
automatically returned to the bowlers by the ship’s periodical pitch
backward.

He has had the same barber for fourteen years. Curiously enough, the
barber’s name is George J. Nath.

His valet’s name is Osuka F. Takami. The latter has a penchant for
polishing Nathan’s patent leather boots with the sofa pillows.

He has seen only one vaudeville show in the last eight years.

He believes that Herma Prach is the prettiest girl on the Viennese
stage and Gladys Gaynor the prettiest on the London stage. He has never
seen a pretty girl on either the Berlin or Paris stage.

His headquarters in London is the Savoy; in Berlin, the Adlon; in
Vienna, the Grand; in Paris, the Astra.

He has never eaten a pickled eel, calf’s brains, chicken livers, or
tongue.

He has never been in a Childs’ restaurant or in Rector’s.

He is of a nervous temperament and the slightest sound during the night
wakes him up.

He looks seven years younger than he is.

He has been shot at three times in America, but never hit.

He likes chop suey, spaghetti, French pastry, horseradish sauce, Welsh
rarebits, oysters _à la Dumas_, raw tomatoes, stuffed baked potatoes,
green peppers, broiled lobster, halibut, mushrooms cooked with caraway
seeds, and chipped beef.

His favorite American city is Philadelphia. His favorite French,
Barbizon. His favorite German, Munich. His favorite English, Leeds.

He covered murder trials in various parts of the country for the
New York _Herald_ during the years of his preparation for dramatic
criticism.

He wears tan pongee silk shirts in summer.

The New Yorkers he admires most are W. R. Hearst, Arthur Hopkins, and
M. Alevy, the eminent _maître d’hôtel_ of the Café des Beaux Arts.

He is the only American dramatic critic who has never succumbed to the
Augustus Thomas, Granville Barker or Belasco rumble-bumble.

He is entirely ignorant of mathematics, geology, botany, and physics.
Like Mencken, however, he is a good speller, and is privy to the
intricacies of punctuation.

The name of the girl who manicures his nails is Miss Priscilla Brown.
She is an orphan.

The claret he commonly serves to his guests costs eighty-five cents a
gallon, in quarts. He buys the labels separately.

His favorite hospitals are the Johns Hopkins, in Baltimore, and Galen
Hall, in Atlantic City. Whenever he is ill he goes to one or the other.

Since 1901 he has loved seventeen different girls, and still remembers
the names of all of them, and their preferences in literature, food,
and wines. Of the seventeen, fourteen are happily married, one has been
married and divorced, and the rest have gone West.

He owns three watches, seventeen scarf-pins, and nineteen pairs of
shoes.

His skull is sub-brachycephalic, with a cephalic index of 83.1. His
cranial capacity, by the system of Deniker, is 1756 cc. His nose is
mesorhinian, and his nasal index is 46.2. The ratio between the length
of his radius and that of his humerus is as 73 is to 100.

By the Binet-Simon test his general intelligence is that of a man of
117 years.

His voice is a baritone, with a range of one octave and two tones.

He never answers questions put to him in letters.

A friend presented him several years ago with a set of O. Henry, which,
try as he will, he can’t get rid of.

He would rather eat a salt-sprinkled raw tomato still hot from the sun
than a dinner from the hand of a French chef.

He has everything he wears made to his order, save his belts and his
socks. He never buys even a hat that is ready-made.

He has written under the pseudonyms of George Narét, Rupert Cross, and
William Drayham.

He has been denounced in the New York newspapers, during his career
as dramatic critic, by three playwrights, five theatrical managers,
eight actresses, twenty-two actors, and almost everyone connected with
vaudeville.

He likes garlic, but refrains from eating it.

He has read Max Beerbohm’s “Happy Hypocrite” thirteen times.

Like Mencken, he is subject to periodic attacks of melancholia.

He has visited every American resort north of Old Point Comfort—and
thinks them all pretty bad.

He believes the Ritz, in Philadelphia, to be the best hotel in America.

He believes the Hudson Theater, in New York, to be the most comfortable
theater in America.

Several years ago, seeking isolation in which to finish a piece of
work, he decided to shut his eyes, run his finger down a New York
Central time-table, and go to the place opposite the name of which his
finger would come to a halt. His finger stopped opposite an exotic
something named New Paltz.... The first person he saw when he got off
at the New Paltz station was the man he had roomed with in his junior
year at college.

He has said that “cleverness” consists merely in saying the wrong thing
at the right time.

He owns three suits of evening clothes.

He wears pongee pajamas.

His one-act play, “The Eternal Mystery,” which was suppressed in
New York and Detroit, created more discussion than any one-act play
produced in America in the last dozen years.

He is kind to dogs, babies, and negroes. He has never given a street
beggar a cent.

Among his closest friends in Europe are Ballington Booth, Jack Johnson,
and M. Philippe Cartier, in charge of the malt department on the Orient
Express.

His most ingenious piece of dramatic criticism was his criticism of
the writings of Augustus Thomas, in which he proved that Thomas’ plays
would be better if they were played backward.

His hair grows so quickly that he has to get a hair-cut every ten days.

His father’s first name was Charles; his middle name, Narét.

He likes hot weather, the hotter the better.

He believes the island of Bermuda to be the most beautiful spot on
earth. He would like to live there—if he couldn’t live in Munich.

He once wrote an article on The Department of the Interior for
_Munsey’s Magazine_. He gave the proceeds, by way of atonement, to the
First Baptist Church of Asbury Park.

He knew Evelyn Nesbit when she was a baby.

He believes that twelve per cent of all reformers and uplifters are
asses, and that the rest are thieves.

He wears low, Byronic collars and rather gaudy neckties.

In philosophy he is a skeptical idealist, believing that the truth is
an illusion and that man is a botch. He has read the works of Kant,
Fichte, and Locke, but can’t remember what was in them. He regards
Schopenhauer, on the woman question, as a sentimentalist whistling in
the dark.

His knowledge of economics is extensive, and he once wrote a pamphlet
against David Ricardo. It has been translated into French, German, and
Bohemian.

He has never written any poetry in English, but published a slim volume
of Petrarchan sonnets in Italian during his student days in Bologna.
The only copy of this book known to exist is in the library of Balliol
College, Oxford. The author’s own copy was lost in the burning of the
Hôtel de France at Lausanne, in the winter of 1903.

He is an excellent Latinist and has translated Albius Tibullus.

His favorite opera is Gluck’s “Iphigénie in Tauris.” He once traveled
from Nice to Dresden to hear it. His chief abomination in the opera
house is “The Jewels of the Madonna.”

While on the staff of the New York _Herald_, James Gordon Bennett
offered him the post of London correspondent. The emolument proposed,
however, made Nathan laugh.

He owns three top hats, fourteen walking sticks, and two Russian
wolf-hounds.

He writes with a Mikado No. 1 lead-pencil.

He is on good terms with but two members of his family.

He reads, on the average, one hundred and fifty foreign plays every
year.

He has read every book on the drama published in America, England,
France, and Germany since 1899.

He uses Calox tooth powder, Colgate’s shaving soap, a double strength
witch hazel, a Gillette razor, and Kitchell’s Horse Liniment. He has
never taken quinine, Peruna, Piso’s Cough Syrup, Sanatogen, asperin,
morphine, opium, or castor oil—but he has taken everything else.

He believes Mencken eats too much.

He has been inoculated against typhoid.

He once, as a boy, ran a railroad locomotive from Cleveland, Ohio, to
Chagrin Falls, Ohio, killing only two cows.

He gets a cinder in his eye on an average of twice a day.

He can drink anything but sweet cordials.

With his meals, he uses Cross and Blackwell’s chow-chow.

In his undergraduate days he was an editor of all the Cornell
University papers.

He wrote articles on the theater for the old _Harper’s Weekly_ for four
years.

He knows three jockeys, eight bartenders, one murderer, two sea
captains, three policemen, one letter carrier, and one politician.

He is a warm friend of Detective William J. Burns.

He likes buttermilk.

Christmas costs him, on the average, about a thousand dollars.

For the last two years he has received weekly anonymous letters from
some woman in Bridgeport, Connecticut, who signs herself with the
initials “L. G.”

He is writing the introduction to Arthur Hopkins’ new book on the drama.

He has not ridden a horse since May 22, 1908.

In October, 1912, he and his broker were wrecked off Barnegat in the
latter’s yacht, _Margo I_, and were rescued via a breeches buoy by the
Barnegat life-saving crew.

He never reads popular novels.

Mr. Winthrop Ames has invited him to write a satirical review for his
Little Theater in New York and Nathan is planning to do the thing
during 1918.

He eats two raw eggs a day to put on weight.

When the victim of a bad cold and unable to smoke, he chews soft
licorice candy while writing.

He believes that George Bickel is the funniest comedian on the American
stage, that Arnold Daly is the best actor, that Margaret Illington is
the best actress.

He has never written a thing that, upon rereading after its appearance
in print, didn’t seem to him to be chock full of flaws.

He is lucky at games of chance, though he seldom plays. In 1912 he won
$2,000 in the Havana lottery.

He owns six belts, one of them presented to him by Gabriele D’Annunzio
and made of wolf hide.

He is in favor of universal military service, imperialism, and
birth-control, but is opposed to woman suffrage, the direct primary,
and prohibition.

His usual pulse is 71 a minute. After drinking it rises to 85.

He keeps no books of account, and does not know his exact income. As a
means of defense against sudden calamity he keeps $3000 in gold in a
safe deposit vault.

His favorite name for girls is Helen.

If he could rechristen himself, he would choose the given name of John.

He pronounces his middle name, not in the French manner, but to rhyme
with bean.

He is a third cousin of Signor Enrico Nathan, the late Socialist mayor
of Rome. His uncle, Dr. Émile Nathan van der Linde, _privat docent_ in
anthropology at Leyden, was killed by savages in Borneo in 1889, while
a member of the Oesterling exploring expedition.

He has never visited the battlefield at Gettysburg.




H. L. MENCKEN


He was born at Baltimore on Sunday, September 12, 1880, and was
baptized in the Church of England.

He was educated at the Baltimore Polytechnic, and is theoretically
competent to run a steam engine or a dynamo, but actually is quite
incapable of doing either.

Down to the age of fifteen it was his ambition to be a chemist, and
to this day he is full of fantastic chemical information and fond of
unloading it. At the age of fourteen he invented a means of toning
photographic silver prints with platinum.

The family business was tobacco, and he was drafted for it on leaving
school. He became a journeyman cigar-maker, and can make excellent
cigars to this day. But when chemistry and business died out,
literature set in, and he took to journalism.

At the age of twenty-three he was city editor and at twenty-five
managing editor of the Baltimore _Herald_, now defunct—the youngest
managing editor of a big city daily in the United States.

He printed a book of poems at twenty-two—now a rare _bibelot_. He was
“discovered,” as the saying is, by Ellery Sedgwick, now editor of
the _Atlantic Monthly_, but then running _Leslie’s Monthly_. He and
Sedgwick have remained on friendly terms to this day, but he sometimes
writes for the _Atlantic_.

In 1900, having read Lafcadio Hearn’s “Two Years in the French West
Indies,” he shipped on a banana boat for the Spanish Main, and has
returned to the West Indies three times since.

He is five feet, eight and a half inches in height, and weighs about
185 pounds. In 1915 he bulged up to 197 pounds. Then he took the Vance
Thompson cure and reduced to 175, rebounding later.

The things he dislikes most are Methodists, college professors,
newspaper editorials (of which, in his time, he has written more than
10,000), Broadway restaurants, reformers, actors, children, magazine
fiction, dining out, the New Freedom, prohibition, sex hygiene, _The
Nation_, soft drinks, women under thirty, the nonconformist conscience,
Socialism, good business men, the moral theory of the world, and the
sort of patriotism that makes a noise.

Among the men he admires are Joseph Conrad, W. R. Hearst, E. W. Howe,
Richard Strauss, Anatole France, and Erich Ludendorff—this last because
he is a great general and has never uttered a single word of patriotic
or pietistic cant. He likes Dreiser, but does not admire him.

His taste in female beauty runs to a slim hussy, not too young, with
dark eyes and a relish for wit. He abhors sentimentality in women,
holding that it is a masculine weakness, and unbecoming the fair. He
seldom falls in love, and then only momentarily.

He wears buttoned shoes because he cannot tie shoe laces. Neither can
he tie a dress tie; if there is no one to tie it for him he has to miss
the party. In general, he is almost wholly devoid of manual dexterity,
though he can play the piano well enough to entertain himself, and is a
good sight reader.

The only art that ever stirs him is music. He views literature
objectively, almost anatomically. He is anæsthetic to painting. His
favorite composers are Beethoven, Haydn, Mozart, Brahms, and Richard
Strauss. He detests Tschaikowsky and Rossini, and likes Wagner better
out of the opera house than in it. In his youth he wrote waltzes. He
abominates song and piano recitals and oratorios. He has a pretty
extensive knowledge of musical technique, and knows a sound sonata from
a bad one. When he improvises it is usually in F major. He has a poor
ear and cannot tune a fiddle.

He drinks all the known alcoholic beverages, but prefers Pilsner to
any other; a few seidels make him very talkative. In the absence of
Pilsner, he drinks Michelob. He seldom drinks at meals and often goes
three or four days without a drink. In wine, he likes whatever is red
and cheap. He detests champagne, Scotch and rye whisky, and gin, though
he drinks them all to be polite. He has a good head, and is not soused
more than once a year, usually at Christmas.

He has good eyes and a gentle mouth, but his nose is upset, his ears
stick out too much, and he is shapeless and stoop-shouldered. One could
not imagine him in the moving pictures. He has strong and white, but
irregular teeth.

He wears a No. 7½ hat. He is bow-legged. He is a fast walker. He used
to snore when asleep, but had his nasal septum straightened by surgery,
and does so no longer.

He takes no interest whatever in any sport. He played baseball as a
boy, but hasn’t seen a game for ten years, and never looks at the
baseball news in the papers. He cannot play tennis or golf, and has
never tried. He knows nothing of cards. He never bets on elections or
horse-races. He never takes any exercise save walking.

He rejects the whole of Christianity, including especially its ethics,
and does not believe that the soul is immortal. His moral code is from
the Chinese and has but one item: keep your engagements. He pays all
bills immediately, never steals what he can buy, and is never late for
an appointment. He has missed but one train in his life.

He believes in war so long as it is not for a moral cause. He advocates
universal military training on the ground that it causes wars.

His table manners are based upon provincial French principles, with
modifications suggested by the Cossacks of the Don.

When at home he arises at eight sharp every morning, and is at his desk
at nine.

He likes to go motoring at night, and often sets out alone at midnight.

He takes a half hour’s nap every afternoon. He can sleep anywhere and
at almost any time.

He has eleven uncles and aunts and eighteen cousins, and has never
quarreled with any of them.

He has been inoculated against typhoid and hay fevers.

He is a prompt correspondent, and answers every letter the day it is
received.

He keeps his watch on an old-fashioned clothes-press in his workroom,
and winds it every time he looks at it.

He detests windy days. As between heat and cold, he prefers heat.

He never preserves love letters, and never writes them.

His tonsils have been cut out. His Wassermann reaction is and always
has been negative. He has a low blood pressure. His heart and kidneys
are normal.

His favorite hotel is the Bayrischer Hof at Munich. After that he ranks
them in the following order: the Adlon, Berlin; the Palace, Madrid; the
Paladst, Copenhagen; the Statler, Buffalo; the Edouard VII, Paris.

He says the best place to eat in the whole world is at the basement
lunch counter of the Rennert Hotel, Baltimore. The best things to order
there are oyster potpie, boiled turkey with oyster sauce, Virginia ham
and spinach, and boiled tongue.

He owns ten suits of clothes, and wears them seriatim. All of them are
of summer weight. He never wears heavy clothes.

He never wears patent leather shoes, even with dress clothes. He wears
horn spectacles for reading, but never otherwise.

Between 1899 and 1906 he wrote and published thirty-five short stories.
Since 1906 he has written none.

For five years he contributed a daily article to the Baltimore _Evening
Sun_. His total writings for newspapers run to nearly 10,000,000 words.
He has reported three national conventions and nine executions.

His one-act play, “The Artist,” has been translated into German,
Dano-Norwegian, Italian, and Russian.

He has twice voted for Roosevelt, not by conviction, but because he
believes Roosevelt gives a better show than any other performer in the
ring. In politics he is a strict federalist.

He advocates woman suffrage on the ground that, if women voted,
democracy would be reduced to an absurdity the sooner.

He is very polite to women, particularly if he dislikes them, which is
usually.

He owns the original manuscript of “Sister Carrie,” presented to him by
Dreiser.

He is a nephew of the late Right Rev. Frederick Bainville
Mencken, bishop of Akkad _in partibus infidelium_. This uncle was
disinherited by his grandfather as a result of a family dispute over
transubstantiation.

His pet literary abominations are “alright” (as one word) and the use
of “near” as an adjective. He will never speak of or to an author who
uses either.

His favorite eating places in New York are Rogers’, the Kloster Glocke,
the Lafayette, and the Café del Pezzo.

The cities he likes best are Munich, Chicago, Baltimore, and London.
He dislikes Paris, Rome, Berlin, and New York—the last-named so much
that, whenever he has any work to do, he goes to Baltimore to do it.

He was an intimate friend of the late Paul Armstrong for many years and
never quarreled with him.

In his own opinion, the best thing he has ever written is “Death: a
Discussion” in his “Book of Burlesques.”

He wears B. V. D.’s all the year round, and actually takes a cold bath
every day.

He never has his nails manicured, but trims them with a jacknife.

Every Saturday night he spends the time between 8 and 10 playing music,
and the time between 10 and 12 drinking Michelob. He plays second piano.

He has received three proposals of marriage, but has never succumbed.
He has never seduced a working girl. He has no issue.

He works in his shirt-sleeves and sleeps in striped pajamas.

He wears Manhattan garters, No. 15½ Belmont collars, and very
long-tailed overcoats. His plug hat, which he wears but two or three
times a year, has a flat brim, like that of a French comedian.

He is smooth-faced and shaves every morning with a Gillette safety
razor. Once, while in Paris, he grew a yellow moustache and goatee.
They lasted, however, but two weeks.

He has lived in one house in Baltimore for 34 years. In it he has 3000
books.

He owns the largest collection of Ibseniana in the world, including
autographs, first editions, and other rarities. Part of it is in
Baltimore, part in Copenhagen, part in Munich, and part in Geneva.

He reads German and Norwegian fluently, French, Spanish, Italian, and
Latin less fluently, and makes shift to sweat through the following:
Russian, Greek, Dutch, Rumanian, Serbian, Czech, Sanskrit, Assyrian,
Hungarian, and Swedish.

His favorite American poet is Lizette Woodworth Reese. He and she have
lived in the same city for years, but they have never met.

His total receipts in royalties on his books, in fifteen years, have
been $172.50.

His personal funds are invested in bonds of the Pennsylvania Railroad,
the Midvale Steel Company, and the Danish, Chilean, and Swiss
governments.

During his newspaper career he was American correspondent of the
Hongkong _Press_, the Kobe _Chronicle_, and the Colombo (Ceylon)
_Observer_.

One of his fads is theology. He understands its technical terminology,
and is sometimes consulted on difficult points by both Catholic and
Protestant clergy.

Down to July 7, 1913, he employed suspenders to hold up his trousers.
Being then convinced by Nathan that such appliances had a socialistic
smack, he abandoned them for a belt.

He reads an average of ten books a week, in addition to those he goes
through for reviewing purposes. The subjects he affects are theology,
biology, economics, and modern history.

He has never read George Eliot, or Jane Austen, or Bulwer-Lytton. He
has never been able to read Dostoievsky, or Turgeniev, or Balzac. His
favorite writers, as a youth, were Thackeray, Huxley, and Kipling.
He seldom reads newspapers. The only magazines he ever looks at are
the _Smart Set_, _Ed Howe’s Monthly_, the _Country Gentleman_, the
_Masses_, the _Seven Arts_, and the _Ladies’ Home Journal_.

He has a wide acquaintance among medical men and knows a good deal
about modern medical problems. His advice is often sought by persons
seeking treatment; he gives it copiously.

He knows mathematics up to plane geometry and trigonometry. He knows
philosophy, chemistry, and history, but is ignorant of physics and
grammar. He can draw with some skill, and was once a good mechanical
draftsman. He is an excellent speller and knows how to punctuate.

In philosophy he is a strict mechanist of the Loeb-Haeckel school. In
psychology he leans toward Adler. He questions pragmatism, but admits
its workableness. He is an advocate of absolute free speech in all
things—and exhibits the utmost intolerance in combatting those who
oppose it.

He believes and argues that sex is a vastly less potent influence in
life than the Puritans and psychanalysts maintain. He advocates the
establishment of lay monasteries for men who care for neither God nor
women.

When he is at home he lunches at noon and dines at six. He never eats
between meals. He never takes a drink before dinner save when on
holiday.

He most often begins his letters to men with the salutation “My dear
Mon Chair.” To women, “My dear Mon Chairy.”

A March ago, he attempted to give up smoking and sought to alleviate
his longing for the weed by sucking slippery elm. He was again pulling
at a stogie the following month.

He has probably done more for talented young writers who have tried in
vain to get a hearing with publishers than any other American critic.
Of all those whom he has helped to obtain an hospitable ear, only one
has ever so much as thanked him.

He forgives anything in a friend—theft, perjury, or stupidity—anything
save hypocrisy. But he has no use for loyalty in others. “Loyalty,” he
says, “is the virtue of a dog.”

He pokes fun at modern musical comedy, particularly the music thereof.
Yet he has never heard “Sari” or “The Purple Road,” or the best of the
last dozen scores of Victor Herbert.

He believes, with Nathan, that the three best stories printed in _The
Smart Set_ under their joint editorial direction have been “The Exiles’
Club,” by Dunsany; “Ashes to Ashes,” by James Gardner Sanderson; and
“The End of Ilsa Menteith,” by Lilith Benda. He believes, like Nathan,
that the most charming sentimental story printed in _The Smart Set_ has
been Lee Pape’s “Little Girl.” He believes, with Nathan, that the best
epigram has been that sent in by an anonymous contributor: “When love
dies there is no funeral. The corpse remains in the house.”

He met Nathan for the first time in the chateau of the Comtesse Hélène
de Firelle in the valley of the Loire, on August 10, 1906. Three days
later they left together for a trip to Munich, to drink the waters.

One of his best pieces of humor is a pun on “_non compos mentis_.” I
cannot print it.

A healthy man, he yet complains hourly of imaginary ailments.

He has never seen Coney Island.

When in his cups, he imagines himself a proficient bass singer.

In the last three years he has been to the theater but once. On this
occasion he accompanied Nathan to a piece called “Common Clay.” He
remained twenty minutes.

He uses handkerchiefs two feet wide.

He always fights with Nathan for the bar or dinner check. His records
of victories is eight per cent.

Like Nathan, he dislikes to talk about business affairs or to listen
to anyone talk about business affairs. Both he and Nathan leave their
finances entirely in the hands of their competent partner, E. F.
Warner.

He and Nathan plan some day to collaborate on a satirical farce with
scenes laid in a Turkish harem.

In conversation he is given to an immoderate employment of the word
“bemuse.”

He believes the following to be his best epigram: “An
anti-vivisectionist is one who gags at a guinea pig and swallows a
baby.” To the contrary, I believe his best to be: “The charm of a man
is measured by the charm of the women who think that he is a scoundrel.”

He wrote dramatic criticisms in Baltimore for four years. At the end of
that period, unable longer to bear the idiocies of the local theaters,
he inserted a $200 half-page advertisement in each of the Baltimore
newspapers to the effect that he would cause the arrest of the next
manager who sent him tickets.

He loves cocoanut pie.

He smokes cigarettes only on rare occasions. He is not used to them
and, on such occasions, holds the cigarette gingerly, as if it were
going to bite him.

Present at a mixed conversation, he frequently dozes off to sleep.

When in New York, every night before retiring he eats a dozen large
clams.

He never drinks beer save in seidels.

He has been to the Horse Show but once. On this occasion he remained
three minutes.

He does not dance.

In Paris, in 1913, he hailed Nathan on the latter’s way to Southampton
with this wireless: “Get off Cherbourg and come direct Paris. Have
discovered place where they have good beer.”

He is unable to sit at table upon finishing dinner. With the arrival of
the finger-bowl he is off for a walk.

He is, at bottom, a sentimentalist. True, he has no use for such
things as babies, love stories (however good), or the Champs Élysées
in the springtime (once while walking up the boulevard with Nathan he
deplored the absence on it of a first-class drugstore), yet he succumbs
moistly to Julia Sanderson singing, “They Wouldn’t Believe Me,” to a
cemetery in the early green of May, to the lachrymose waltz from “Eva,”
which he plays upon the piano in a melancholious _pianissimo_, and to
any poem about a dog (however bad).

His trousers are never creased. His clothes are always of a navy blue
shade. He never wears a waistcoat. He buys the best cravats that can be
obtained for fifty cents.

He loves liqueurs, preferably _crême de cacao_. They always make him
feel badly the next morning.

He has written the following books: “A Book of Prefaces,” “A Little
Book in C Major,” “A Book of Burlesques,” “The Battle of the
Wilhelmstrasse,” “The Artist,” “The Gist of Nietzsche,” “The Philosophy
of Friedrich Nietzsche,” “Europe after 8:15” (in collaboration with
Nathan and Wright), “Men _vs._ the Man” (in collaboration with R. R. La
Monte), and “George Bernard Shaw: His Plays.” The latter was the first
book on Shaw ever published.

He eats and enjoys all varieties of human food. There is no dish that
he doesn’t eat. He has eaten snails, frogs, eels, octopus, catfish,
goat meat, and Norwegian cheese. He thinks that the best roasts are the
English, the best table wines the Spanish, the best pastry the Danish,
the best soups the German, and the best cooking the French.

He has visited the following countries: England, Holland, Norway,
Denmark, Italy, Germany, Austria, Russia, Spain, France, Switzerland,
and Cuba. He has never been in Canada or Mexico, and has never been
further West than St. Louis.

He has been under rifle and shell fire in this war, on the eastern
front, and was glad to get under cover. He has been in France,
Germany, and Russia during the war. He was nowhere mistaken for a spy,
and was always treated courteously. He says that 99 per cent of the
authors of war books are liars.

His family is well-to-do, and he has never been dead broke.

He has never seen a moving picture show.

He is opposed to vice crusades, holding that the average prostitute is
decenter than the average reformer. He ascribes the crusading spirit,
following Freud, to a suppressed and pathological sexuality.

He wears (and owns) no jewelry whatever, not even a scarfpin, but he
sports a formidable Swiss watch, with a split second hand and a bell
that strikes the quarter hours. He never wears gloves save in intensely
cold weather.

He owns and drives a 1916 Studebaker car, and never has it washed.

Once, on receiving an amorous _billet doux_ from a fair admirer, he
sent it back to the writer with a _Smart Set_ rejection slip.

He frequently carries on a perfectly innocent conversation with Nathan
in a low stage whisper, thus lending to his most trivial remarks a
secret and sinister import.

He introduced the new widespread use of “jitney” as an adjective. He
also coined the words “smuthound” and “snouter,” both designating a
“malignant moralist”—another of his invention.

While playing the piano, he keeps the loud pedal glued to the floor
from _couvert_ to _coda_.

He and Nathan, in all the years of their friendship, have quarreled but
once. This was in the late summer of 1916, when Mencken was suffering
from a violent attack of hay fever and insisted upon going to bed one
night at eleven o’clock, thus leaving the disgusted Nathan to kill
time as best he could until midnight, at that period his hour for
retiring.

He never wears rubbers, carries an umbrella, or wears a mackintosh. He
likes to walk in the rain and get wet.

He alludes to all actors as “cabots.” For the plural of “genius” he
uses “genii.”

He travels with a suitcase large enough to transport a circus.

At the age of twenty-nine he was invited to join the Elks.... The
judge, a friend of his, reduced the charge from “assault with intent to
kill” to “assault and battery.”

He has never had typhoid fever, smallpox, cholera, scarlet fever,
arthritis, appendicitis, or delirium tremens. He has never had a
headache. He can digest anything.

He has been involved, in his time, in eight lawsuits, and has won them
all, chiefly by perjury.

His first name is Henry; his middle name, Louis. He never spells them
out, signing himself always simply H. L.

He drinks a brand of cheap claret which he lays in in shipments of ten
cases.

He has presented the steward of the Florestan Club, of Baltimore, with
a bronze medal for reviving Maryland hoe cake.

A life-long opponent of Puritanism in all its forms, he is on good
personal terms with many Puritan reformers, and always reads the tracts
they send to him.

He has been arrested four times, once in Paris, once in Copenhagen, and
twice in America. He was acquitted each time, though guilty.

He complains ceaselessly over what it costs him to live. Yet he is
a liberal fellow and keeps Nathan supplied with cigars. The cigars,
however, are not to Nathan’s taste.

He is an omnivorous borrower of matches.

He washes his hands twenty-four times a day.

He writes directly upon the typewriter, never longhand. He signs all
his letters with the episcopal “Yours in Xt.”

For the last four years he and Nathan have been planning a motor trip
through Virginia. They will never make it, both agree emphatically.

His favorite dish is anything _à la Créole_.

He once brought from abroad, as a gift to his negro cook, three dozen
strings of Venetian beads. She is a strict Baptist and declined to wear
them.

His favorite novel is “Huckleberry Finn”; his favorite name for a
woman, Maggie.

He often goes without breakfast, and never eats more than an apple and
a slice of dry bread.

He and Nathan have their secretaries in _The Smart Set_ offices keep
a list of forty-two bad writers. Opposite the name of each of the
forty-two is the fine one must pay the other if the name is uttered by
either.

He slicks his hair down like the actor who plays the heroic lieutenant
in the military dramas.

He likes to ride down Fifth Avenue in a victoria.

He owns a plaid shirt. He wears it.

He has worn the same straw hat for five years. He cleans it every
spring with a tooth-brush dipped in bicarbonate of soda and Pebeco
tooth paste. Each spring he buys a new tooth-brush.

He writes in a bare room. There is no carpet or rug on the floor. The
only pictures on the wall are portraits of his great-great-grandfather,
Ibsen, Conrad, Marcella Allonby, Mark Twain, and Johannes Brahms.

He sleeps on a sleeping porch adjoining his office. He uses, as a
blanket, a Persian shawl presented to him by the late Lafcadio Hearn.

He has read 9872 bad novels during his active life as a literary
critic.

He is an artist of no mean ability. His portrait of Nathan, reproduced
in the Chicago _Daily News_ in May, 1917, attracted wide attention
and, among other things, brought him requests for sittings from Hamlin
Garland, William Lyon Phelps, and Robert B. Mantell.

He clips the ends off his cigars with his side teeth.

He has written under the pseudonyms of William R. Fink, William
Drayham, John F. Brownell, Harriet Morgan, W. L. D. Bell, Gladys
Jefferson, and Baroness Julie Desplaines.

He sees nothing beautiful about the Hudson from Riverside Drive, but
believes St. Thomas’s to be one of the most beautiful churches in the
world.

He collects odd pieces of furniture, Japanese wood carvings, and bad
plaster of paris casts.

He knows two actors, George Fawcett and Frank Craven.

He was taught how to swim by John Adams Thayer.

He is the author of a farce that has played on Broadway for one hundred
nights. To this authorship, no one save Nathan, James Huneker, A. H.
Woods, and myself have been privy.

His high-water marks in the matter of malt bibbing are as follows:
Pschorrbräu, Munich, 8 _masses_ in two hours and seven minutes;
Appenrodt’s, Paris, 9 _seidels_ in one hour and a quarter; Lüchow’s,
New York, 13 _seidels_ and one glass in one hour, twenty-one minutes
and twelve seconds. Timers: Pschorrbräu, Arthur Abbott, H. B. M.
vice-consul; Appenrodt’s, Pierre Disdebaux, of Marseilles, France;
Lüchow’s, Theodore Dreiser, of Warsaw, Indiana, U. S. A.

He was a regular reader of the _Boston Transcript_, the New York
_Times_, and the _Youth’s Companion_, up to the age of ten.

He believes W. L. George to be the best of the younger English
novelists.

His signature runs up hill.

He has been cured of hay-fever and is at present writing a pamphlet
extolling the discoverers of the cure.

He admires the kind of Munich “art” that is sold in the Fifth Avenue
shops at $4.35 the picture.

He likes to look in shop windows. He has never ridden in a Ferris Wheel.

He laments the fact that he gets no exercise and contemplates fixing up
a carpenter shop in the basement of his house in Baltimore, so that he
may saw and chop his arms back into muscular shape.

He numbers the paragraphs of his letters and never writes more than six
paragraphs.

The English critics hailed his Nietzsche book as the best thing of its
sort that had come out of America.

He has never read Shakespeare’s “Venus and Adonis” or “Pericles, Prince
of Tyre.”

He believes that all fat women are sentimental and says that the
publisher who will edit a magazine for this clientèle will make a
fortune. Inasmuch as magazine fiction heroines are at present always
slim, elf-like creatures, he contends that the sentimental fat girl
never gets a fair chance to enjoy herself, and that, accordingly, a
magazine with no heroine weighing less than one hundred and ninety
pounds would in one year put Cyrus K. Curtis in the pauper class.

Like Nathan, he believes that the theory that it is difficult to
make money is poppycock. If one is willing to give the public what
it wants, anyone—argue these two—can get rich very quickly. To prove
their contention, they outlined plans for several cheap magazines three
years ago, which, upon being put into circulation, proved immediate and
overwhelming successes. Mencken and Nathan, at the end of six months,
sold their joint interest for $100,000. They argue that the thing is as
simple as rolling off a log, and that any person who is interested in
this sort of thing may become a Street-and-Smith or Munsey overnight.

At the age of nineteen, he invented a slot machine for the vending of
patent medicines on excursion boats.

He has read “Huckleberry Finn” twenty-seven times. He reads the book
once a year, regularly.

He has never seen Mrs. Castle, Mary Garden, Ann Pennington, Maurice and
Walton, Mary Pickford, or Secretary Lansing.

He has shaken hands with Billy Sunday.

Wherever he goes he carries a Corona typewriter. He paid $50 cash
for it, but nevertheless he has given the manufacturers an eloquent
testimonial. He writes on cheap newspaper copy-paper.

He is fond of candy.

He is an ardent defender of organized charity, arguing that it helps
progress by making charity difficult and obnoxious.

He is often mistaken for a misogynist. He is actually a strict
monogamist. He believes that all men are naturally monogamists, and
that polygamy is due to vanity.

He began to edit the plays of Ibsen in 1910, but abandoned the
enterprise after he had issued “A Doll’s House” and “Little Eyolf.”

He is a bitter opponent of Christian Science, and has written all sorts
of things, from epigrams to long articles, against it.

The La Mencken cigar, once popular throughout the South, was not named
after him, but after his father.

He is a good sailor, and has been seasick but once—on a 1000-ton
British tramp in a West Indian hurricane.

In blood he is chiefly Saxon, Danish, Bavarian, and Irish—no
Anglo-Saxon, no Prussian, no Latin. The portraits of his Saxon
forefathers show strong Slavic traces. He is the present head of the
family. A Mencken, in the seventeenth century, founded the first
scientific review in Europe. Another was privy councilor to Frederick
the Great. Another was rector of the University of Leipzig. Yet another
was chief justice of the supreme court there. A Mlle. Mencken was the
mother of Bismarck.

The Menckenii were converted to Christianity in 1569, but returned
to paganism during the Napoleonic wars, in which twelve of them were
killed and sixty-three wounded.

The present Mencken is an amateur of military science, and has written
a brochure, privately printed, on the Battle of Tannenberg.

He writes very slowly and laboriously, save when writing for
newspapers. Then he is highly facile, and can turn out a two-column
article in three hours. He has never learned to dictate.

He used to have a mole on the back of his neck, but had it removed in
the summer of 1913.

He is not afraid of the dark, or of spiders, or of snakes, or of cats.
He likes dogs better than any other animals, and regards them as more
respectable than men.

If he could choose another given name it would be Francis.

He owns two hundred acres of land near Innsbruck, in the Tyrol, and
will build a bungalow on it after the war.

He is a violent anti-Socialist, as “Men _vs._ the Man” shows, but he
reads all the new Socialist books.

In American history the men he most admires are Washington, Jefferson,
Hamilton, and Cleveland. He has a low opinion of Lincoln, Jackson, and
Bryan.

He is handy with horses, and can drive four-in-hand.

He detests cut flowers, carpets, the sea-shore, hotels, zoological
gardens, the subway, the Y. M. C. A., literary women, witch hazel,
talcum powder, limp leather bookbindings, aerated waters, bottled
beer, low collars, public libraries, and phonographs.

He is a Cockney, and prefers the city to the country.

He never wears tan shoes.

He can swallow castor oil without disgust and without needing a chaser,
but he never does so.

Next to Pilsner and Burgundy (or, in wartime, Michelob) his favorite
drink is city water direct from the tap—no ice.

He chews cigars.

He is a very fast reader and can get through a two hundred-page book in
an hour.


IV

So much for my observations and investigations of the two gentlemen,
MM. Nathan and Mencken. I have told you, not everything that is known
about them, nor even all that I know myself, but enough, I hope, to
enable you to conjure up colorable images of them. As I have said, it
is by such small and often grotesque lights that character is genuinely
illuminated—not by the steady and distorting glare of orthodox
biography. It remains for me to tell you how they do their joint
work—work which rests upon the apparently perilous basis of an absolute
equality of authority, for each owns exactly the same amount of stock
in _The Smart Set_ Company that the other owns, and each is editor
equally with the other, and both derive from the property exactly the
same revenue, to a cent.

Their system is very simple and admirably workable. When either, by
any internal or external process, generates an idea for the conduct of
the magazine, he lays it before the other in all its details. This is
always done in writing; never orally. If the other approves the idea he
writes upon the brief the words “Nihil obstat,” and it is forthwith
executed. If, on the contrary, he disapproves, he indorses it with
the word “Veto” and it is returned. The same idea may be revived by
its author thirty days later, but not before. If thrice vetoed it is
forever banned. The office records for the past three years yield the
following:

                Plans Proposed  Approved  Vetoed
  By Nathan           18           13        5
  By Mencken          12            8        4

In the handling of manuscripts they pursue a somewhat analogous system.
Mencken never reads manuscripts while in New York; all such work he
does in Baltimore. As the offerings of authors are received in the
office they are scrutinized by Nathan’s secretary, and the following
classes are weeded out and immediately returned:

 Mss. written in pencil or with green, purple, or red typewriter
 ribbons.

 Mss. fastened together with ribbons or pins.

 Mss. radiating any scent or other odor.

 Mss. of plays which begin with soliloquies into a telephone.

 Mss. bearing the recommendations of the editors of other magazines.

 Mss. accompanied by letters of more than one hundred words.

 Mss. accompanied by circulars advertising books written by their
 authors or by other printed matter.

 Mss. of poetry by poets whose names do not appear upon a list in the
 possession of the secretary.

Once this preliminary clearing out is accomplished, the manuscripts
that remain are shipped to Mencken, and he reads them within twenty
four hours. Those that he rejects are returned to their authors. Those
that he approves are returned to Nathan, with the Dano-Norwegian word
“bifald,” signifying assent, written across the first page of each.
They are then read by Nathan, and if he agrees they are purchased and
paid for at once. If he disagrees they are returned without further
process. Once a manuscript is bought it goes to Mencken a second time,
and he reads it again. If he finds that it needs revision in detail,
it is turned over to his private secretary and valet, an intelligent
Maryland colored man named William F. Beauchamp, a graduate of Harvard.
After it has passed through Beauchamp’s hands it is set up in type. In
case Mencken deems it necessary to reject a manuscript by an author
who must be treated politely, he sends it back with a note putting
the blame on Nathan. In case Nathan, in like circumstances, votes no,
he blames it upon Mencken. This, of course, is lying, but in the long
run it amounts to the truth. The two never discuss manuscripts; they
simply vote. They never buy anything from personal friends. They have a
strict agreement, in fact, that each will automatically veto anything
sent in by an author with whom he is on good terms. This agreement is
never violated. Nathan, for example, has a brother who, under a _nom
de plume_, is a frequent contributor to the leading magazines, but
is barred from _The Smart Set_ by the relationship. In the same way
Mencken was, until recently, the intimate friend and confidant of an
eminent woman novelist, but her work has never appeared in _The Smart
Set_.

When Mencken is in New York, he and Nathan meet at _The Smart Set_
office every day, including Sunday, at 10 A.M., and spend two hours
discussing the minor business of the magazine. At noon they proceed
to Delmonico’s and have luncheon, returning at 3 P.M. They finish all
business by 4:30, when they leave the office. They often dine together
and spend the evening together, but they never discuss office matters
at such times. They never invite authors to luncheon or dinner and
never accept invitations from them. They never attend literary parties
or visit studios. They are not acquainted with any of the literary
lions of New York, saving only Dreiser and Huneker.

Thus these meritorious _redacteurs_ live and have their being. Neither
belongs to a literary clique; neither subscribes to a clipping bureau;
neither ever sits on a committee or joins a movement; neither needs
money; neither ever borrows anything or asks a favor; neither is
accountable to anyone; neither is ever indignant; neither gives a damn.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 29 Changed: The End of Ilsa Mentieth by Lilith Benda
             to: The End of Ilsa Menteith by Lilith Benda





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PISTOLS FOR TWO ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


